
===== PDF PAGE 1 of 17 (pdftotext -layout) =====
 L E T T E R S




      OBSERVATIONS                             25 mg, which was eventually increased to                               JOHN A. KIAYIAS, MD
                                               75 mg, at bedtime was effective when                          EUGENIA D. VLACHOU, RN, MSC
                                               given to 4 patients. The degree of pain                         ELLI LAKKA-PAPADODIMA, MD
Venlafaxine HCl in                             relief was significant, but the side effects in
                                                                                                 From the Department of Endocrinology and Metab-
                                               2 patients were intolerable. In 1 patient,
the Treatment of                               amitriptyline caused sedation that inter-
                                                                                                 olism, Athens Polyclinic Hospital, Athens, Greece.
                                                                                                     Address correspondence to John A. Kiayias, MD,
Painful Peripheral                             fered with the patient’s ability to drive a       Papadiamantopoylou 26 St., Athens, 11528 Greece.
                                               car; in the other patient, the drug caused
Diabetic Neuropathy                            postural hypotension.
                                                    Finally, we administered venlafaxine         References
   n a recent letter by Davis and Smith (1),   HCl in a dose of 37.5 mg twice a day to all        1. Davis JL, Smith RL: Painful peripheral dia-


I  venlafaxine HCl was reported to be
   effective in the symptomatic treatment
of patients with painful diabetic neuropa-
thy. This observation is in accordance with
                                               of the patients. The results were impres-
                                               sive, and none of the patients experienced
                                               the side effects associated with administra-
                                               tion of amitriptyline.
                                                                                                     betic neuropathy treated with venlafaxine
                                                                                                     HCl extended release capsules (Letter).
                                                                                                     Diabetes Care 22:1909–1910, 1999
                                                                                                  2. Lang E, Hord AH, Denson D: Venlafaxine
                                                                                                     HCl (Effexor) relieves thermal hyperalge-
a similar finding made by us.                       Well before experiencing the antide-             sia in rats with an experimental mononeu-
     We administered venlafaxine HCl in 8      pressant effect of the drug, the patients             ropathy. Pain 68:151–155, 1996
patients who had unremitting painful           experienced a dramatic relief in the symp-         3. Ereshefsky L: Drug-drug interactions
peripheral diabetic neuropathy that did not    toms associated with painful peripheral               involving antidepressants: focus on ven-
respond to conventional analgesia. All         neuropathy within 2–8 days after initiat-             lafaxine. J Clin Psychopharmacol 16:37–50,
patients had type 2 diabetes and were of       ing treatment with venlafaxine HCl.                   1996
                                                                                                  4. Rudolph RL, Derivan AT: The safety and tol-
Greek origin. The patients’ ages ranged             In 2 patients, administration of the drug        erability of venlafaxine HCl: analysis of the
from 49 to 80 years, and their duration of     resulted in nausea, but these episodes were           clinical trials database. J Clin Psychopharma-
diabetes ranged from 6 to 21 years. Of these   not severe enough to warrant the cessation            col 16:54–59, 1996
patients, 5 were men and 3 were women; 5       of treatment. Resolution of venlafaxine-asso-
of the patients were being treated with oral   ciated nausea occurred rapidly in both
antidiabetic agents, and 3 were on treat-      patients, and the treatment remained unin-        Bilateral Diabetic
ment with insulin. The glycemic control of     terrupted. No serious side effects were
each patient was good (mean HbA1c value        observed. It is worth noting that venlafaxine     Infarction of the
7.2 ± 1.2%).                                   HCl was especially effective in relieving the     Anterior Tibial
     Peripheral sensory neuropathy was         symptoms of diabetic neuropathy in the 3          Muscle
present in all of them, and treatment with     insulin-treated diabetic patients. The
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and       patients began using insulin during only the
acetaminophen was unsuccessful.                last months of the study, and, after experi-             iabetic syndromes in which the mus-
     Symptoms of neuropathy included
sharp, stabbing, or burning pain on the
feet; numbness; and tingling. The symp-
toms were unremitting with nocturnal
                                               encing an improvement in glycemic control,
                                               they experienced an exacerbation of the
                                               symptoms of neuropathy. This is a well-
                                               known phenomenon. Venlafaxine HCl was
                                                                                                 D      cles, rather than peripheral nerves,
                                                                                                        are the primary sites of pathology are
                                                                                                 rare. Some studies have identified the
                                                                                                 muscles of the thigh (1–3) and a very few
exacerbation. The vibration sense, which       dramatically effective in reducing the pain of    studies have identified the muscles of the
was examined by use of a tuning fork, was      neuropathy in this group of patients.             leg (4–7) as sites of infarctions, each spar-
decreased, and the ankle tendon reflexes            The mode of action of venlafaxine HCl        ing the anterior tibial muscle, which is
were absent in all of the patients. Other      is unknown. Venlafaxine HCl has been              more frequently involved in mechanically
frequent causes of peripheral sensory neu-     shown to be effective in relieving thermal        induced compartment compression syn-
ropathy, such as uremia, myxedema, B12         hyperalgesia in rats with experimentally          dromes (8). We are reporting on a 71-year-
deficiency, and alcoholism, were excluded.     induced neuropathic pain (2).                     old woman with poorly controlled type 2
     We tried several therapeutic regimens          Venlafaxine HCl seems to have one of         diabetes suffering from bilateral isolated
for the management of this common and          the most favorable drug interaction pro-          diabetic infarctions of the anterior tibial
difficult-to-treat problem. Administration     files, and data indicate that it does not         muscles, occurring within an interval of 7
of carbamazepine resulted in some benefit      inhibit, or that it weakly inhibits, the activ-   months and confirmed by magnetic reso-
when given to 2 of the patients, but the       ity of isoenzymes CYP2C9, CYP2D6,                 nance imaging (MRI). Six weeks before
drug was discontinued because of dizzi-        CYP1A2, or CYP3A3/4 (3,4). This is an             admission, she had suddenly experienced
ness in 1 patient and because of elevation     important characteristic in view of the fact      pain, local tenderness, and hypesthesia of
of liver enzymes (aspartate aminotrans-        that type 2 diabetic patients are usually         the right leg without any previous physical
ferase, alanine aminotransferase, and          already on treatment with oral antidiabetic       exercise or trauma. There was no reported
gamma-glutamyl-transpeptidase) in the          agents or several other drugs.                    fever, swelling of the leg, or associated local
other patient. Application of capsaicin             Our observations, which are in agree-        erythema, but there was some numbness
cream was temporarily effective in 2 other     ment with those of Davis and Smith (1),           and paresthesia of the anterolateral part of
patients, but the symptoms were only           reinforce their suggestion that venlafaxine       the right leg. The pain worsened over the
mildly to moderately alleviated. Adminis-      HCl may be useful in the treatment of             subsequent 3 weeks. On examination, the
tration of amitriptyline in a single dose of   painful peripheral diabetic neuropathy.           patient was afebrile but in pain. Muscle


DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000                                                                                                   699

===== PDF PAGE 1 of 17 (reading order, same page) =====
L E T T E R S

OBSERVATIONS
Venlafaxine HCl in
the Treatment of
Painful Peripheral
Diabetic Neuropathy
n a recent letter by Davis and Smith (1),
venlafaxine HCl was reported to be
effective in the symptomatic treatment
of patients with painful diabetic neuropathy. This observation is in accordance with
a similar finding made by us.
We administered venlafaxine HCl in 8
patients who had unremitting painful
peripheral diabetic neuropathy that did not
respond to conventional analgesia. All
patients had type 2 diabetes and were of
Greek origin. The patients’ ages ranged
from 49 to 80 years, and their duration of
diabetes ranged from 6 to 21 years. Of these
patients, 5 were men and 3 were women; 5
of the patients were being treated with oral
antidiabetic agents, and 3 were on treatment with insulin. The glycemic control of
each patient was good (mean HbA1c value
7.2 ± 1.2%).
Peripheral sensory neuropathy was
present in all of them, and treatment with
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and
acetaminophen was unsuccessful.
Symptoms of neuropathy included
sharp, stabbing, or burning pain on the
feet; numbness; and tingling. The symptoms were unremitting with nocturnal
exacerbation. The vibration sense, which
was examined by use of a tuning fork, was
decreased, and the ankle tendon reflexes
were absent in all of the patients. Other
frequent causes of peripheral sensory neuropathy, such as uremia, myxedema, B12
deficiency, and alcoholism, were excluded.
We tried several therapeutic regimens
for the management of this common and
difficult-to-treat problem. Administration
of carbamazepine resulted in some benefit
when given to 2 of the patients, but the
drug was discontinued because of dizziness in 1 patient and because of elevation
of liver enzymes (aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, and
gamma-glutamyl-transpeptidase) in the
other patient. Application of capsaicin
cream was temporarily effective in 2 other
patients, but the symptoms were only
mildly to moderately alleviated. Administration of amitriptyline in a single dose of

I

DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000

25 mg, which was eventually increased to
75 mg, at bedtime was effective when
given to 4 patients. The degree of pain
relief was significant, but the side effects in
2 patients were intolerable. In 1 patient,
amitriptyline caused sedation that interfered with the patient’s ability to drive a
car; in the other patient, the drug caused
postural hypotension.
Finally, we administered venlafaxine
HCl in a dose of 37.5 mg twice a day to all
of the patients. The results were impressive, and none of the patients experienced
the side effects associated with administration of amitriptyline.
Well before experiencing the antidepressant effect of the drug, the patients
experienced a dramatic relief in the symptoms associated with painful peripheral
neuropathy within 2–8 days after initiating treatment with venlafaxine HCl.
In 2 patients, administration of the drug
resulted in nausea, but these episodes were
not severe enough to warrant the cessation
of treatment. Resolution of venlafaxine-associated nausea occurred rapidly in both
patients, and the treatment remained uninterrupted. No serious side effects were
observed. It is worth noting that venlafaxine
HCl was especially effective in relieving the
symptoms of diabetic neuropathy in the 3
insulin-treated diabetic patients. The
patients began using insulin during only the
last months of the study, and, after experiencing an improvement in glycemic control,
they experienced an exacerbation of the
symptoms of neuropathy. This is a wellknown phenomenon. Venlafaxine HCl was
dramatically effective in reducing the pain of
neuropathy in this group of patients.
The mode of action of venlafaxine HCl
is unknown. Venlafaxine HCl has been
shown to be effective in relieving thermal
hyperalgesia in rats with experimentally
induced neuropathic pain (2).
Venlafaxine HCl seems to have one of
the most favorable drug interaction profiles, and data indicate that it does not
inhibit, or that it weakly inhibits, the activity of isoenzymes CYP2C9, CYP2D6,
CYP1A2, or CYP3A3/4 (3,4). This is an
important characteristic in view of the fact
that type 2 diabetic patients are usually
already on treatment with oral antidiabetic
agents or several other drugs.
Our observations, which are in agreement with those of Davis and Smith (1),
reinforce their suggestion that venlafaxine
HCl may be useful in the treatment of
painful peripheral diabetic neuropathy.

JOHN A. KIAYIAS, MD
EUGENIA D. VLACHOU, RN, MSC
ELLI LAKKA-PAPADODIMA, MD
From the Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Athens Polyclinic Hospital, Athens, Greece.
Address correspondence to John A. Kiayias, MD,
Papadiamantopoylou 26 St., Athens, 11528 Greece.

References
1. Davis JL, Smith RL: Painful peripheral diabetic neuropathy treated with venlafaxine
HCl extended release capsules (Letter).
Diabetes Care 22:1909–1910, 1999
2. Lang E, Hord AH, Denson D: Venlafaxine
HCl (Effexor) relieves thermal hyperalgesia in rats with an experimental mononeuropathy. Pain 68:151–155, 1996
3. Ereshefsky L: Drug-drug interactions
involving antidepressants: focus on venlafaxine. J Clin Psychopharmacol 16:37–50,
1996
4. Rudolph RL, Derivan AT: The safety and tolerability of venlafaxine HCl: analysis of the
clinical trials database. J Clin Psychopharmacol 16:54–59, 1996

Bilateral Diabetic
Infarction of the
Anterior Tibial
Muscle
iabetic syndromes in which the muscles, rather than peripheral nerves,
are the primary sites of pathology are
rare. Some studies have identified the
muscles of the thigh (1–3) and a very few
studies have identified the muscles of the
leg (4–7) as sites of infarctions, each sparing the anterior tibial muscle, which is
more frequently involved in mechanically
induced compartment compression syndromes (8). We are reporting on a 71-yearold woman with poorly controlled type 2
diabetes suffering from bilateral isolated
diabetic infarctions of the anterior tibial
muscles, occurring within an interval of 7
months and confirmed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Six weeks before
admission, she had suddenly experienced
pain, local tenderness, and hypesthesia of
the right leg without any previous physical
exercise or trauma. There was no reported
fever, swelling of the leg, or associated local
erythema, but there was some numbness
and paresthesia of the anterolateral part of
the right leg. The pain worsened over the
subsequent 3 weeks. On examination, the
patient was afebrile but in pain. Muscle

D

699


===== PDF PAGE 2 of 17 (pdftotext -layout) =====
Letters


                                                                                                            count. Standard motor nerve conduction
                                                                                                            and F-wave studies of bilateral deep per-
                                                                                                            oneal and tibial nerves were normal. Sen-
                                                                                                            sory nerve conduction studies of both sural
                                                                                                            nerves showed reduced action potential
                                                                                                            amplitudes and normal nerve conduction
                                                                                                            velocities. Concentric needle electromyog-
                                                                                                            raphy (EMG) of the right anterior tibial
                                                                                                            muscle displayed severe fibrillations and
                                                                                                            positive sharp waves (3 on a scale from 0
                                                                                                            to 4). In contrast, there were only a few
                                                                                                            questionable fibrillations in the extensor
                                                                                                            hallucis longus muscle and posterior tibial
                                                                                                            muscle, and no pathologic spontaneous
                                                                                                            activity in the peronaeus longus, rectus
                                                                                                            femoris, vastus medialis, gastrocnemius,
                                                                                                            gluteus medius, and adductor longus mus-
                                                                                                            cles. Motor unit potentials of the anterior
                                                                                                            tibial muscle were slightly enlarged. The
                                                                                                            follow-up EMG examination, 8 days later,
                                                                                                            did not show any significant change in the
                                                                                                            distribution of the spontaneous activity,
                                                                                                            which was still very prominent in the ante-
                                                                                                            rior tibial muscle and at this time not pres-
                                                                                                            ent in the posterior tibial muscle. The plain
                                                                                                            X-ray of the leg showed no skeletal lesions.
                                                                                                            B-mode sonography of the anterolateral leg
                                                                                                            muscles and Doppler sonography and
                                                                                                            duplex scanning of the lower-limb arteries
                                                                                                            were normal. The MRI of the lumbar spine
                                                                                                            was normal. The MRI of the right leg
                                                                                                            showed high signal intensity of the anterior
                                                                                                            tibial muscle (Fig. 1C), while all other per-
                                                                                                            oneal muscles, as well as the gastrocnemius
                                                                                                            muscle appeared with normal signals in the
                                                                                                            long T2-weighted images. No abnormali-
                                                                                                            ties could be detected in the other tissues
                                                                                                            such as nerves, bones, or soft tissues. In
                                                                                                            T1-weighted images, before and after con-
                                                                                                            trast enhancement, no significant signal
Figure 1—Sagittal MRI of the right and left lower leg (1A, 1D). Inversion recovery images with fat          abnormalities were present. Inversion
signal suppression reveal high water content of the anterior tibial muscle (long arrows), suggestive of     recovery MRI techniques were applied to
subacute infarction, while signal of the gastrocnemius muscle (arrowheads) is normal. The corre-            differentiate between the fat and water con-
sponding axial slices 10 cm below the knee demonstrate signal abnormality of the anterior tibial mus-
                                                                                                            tents of the muscle structure by using delay
cle (short arrows), while the muscles of the peroneal group and gastrocnemius appear normal (1B:
inversion recovery MRI; 1C, 1E: long T2-weighted MRI).                                                      times for the inversion pulse producing fat
                                                                                                            and water signal suppression. These images
                                                                                                            revealed a normal fat distribution but an
strength of the right lower limb was normal          both legs (2 cm), but there was some mild             increased net-water content of the anterior
with the exception of paretic dorsal exten-          bilateral ankle edema. The fasting blood glu-          tibial muscle (Fig. 1A, 1B).
sion of the foot (grade 4 Medical Research           cose was 147 mg/dl, the HbA1c concentra-                    With analgesic therapy, the symptoms
Council [MRC]). She was unable to walk on            tion was 6.7% (normal 5.7%), and the C-               gradually improved until they completely
her heels. Tendon reflexes were normal in            peptide level was 1.43 mmol/l (normal                  resolved after 7 weeks. However, 7 months
the arms and hyporeactive in the knees and           0.99 mmol/l). The white blood cell count              later, the patient was readmitted because of
ankles. There was hyperpathia to tactile             was 7,500 cells/mm3 with a normal differen-            similar pain and tenderness of the antero-
stimuli and paresthesia in the distal part of        tial. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was           lateral left leg. On admission, she was
the anterolateral right leg. Pinprick and light      33 mm/h and the C-reactive protein 2.0                 unable to walk on her heels, and dorsal
touch sensation was attenuated in the same           mg/l (normal 2.0 mg/l). Repeated levels of            extension of the foot was grade 3 MRC on
area. All peripheral arterial pulses were nor-       creatine kinase, coagulation tests, and creati-        the left and 4 MRC on the right. Hyper-
mal. There was no significant difference             nine levels were normal. Cerebrospinal fluid           pathia to tactile stimuli and paresthesia of
between the maximal circumferences of                showed normal protein content and cell                 the anterolateral aspect of the left leg were


700                                                                                                       DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000

===== PDF PAGE 2 of 17 (reading order, same page) =====
Letters

Figure 1—Sagittal MRI of the right and left lower leg (1A, 1D). Inversion recovery images with fat
signal suppression reveal high water content of the anterior tibial muscle (long arrows), suggestive of
subacute infarction, while signal of the gastrocnemius muscle (arrowheads) is normal. The corresponding axial slices 10 cm below the knee demonstrate signal abnormality of the anterior tibial muscle (short arrows), while the muscles of the peroneal group and gastrocnemius appear normal (1B:
inversion recovery MRI; 1C, 1E: long T2-weighted MRI).

strength of the right lower limb was normal
with the exception of paretic dorsal extension of the foot (grade 4 Medical Research
Council [MRC]). She was unable to walk on
her heels. Tendon reflexes were normal in
the arms and hyporeactive in the knees and
ankles. There was hyperpathia to tactile
stimuli and paresthesia in the distal part of
the anterolateral right leg. Pinprick and light
touch sensation was attenuated in the same
area. All peripheral arterial pulses were normal. There was no significant difference
between the maximal circumferences of
700

both legs (2 cm), but there was some mild
bilateral ankle edema. The fasting blood glucose was 147 mg/dl, the HbA1c concentration was 6.7% (normal 5.7%), and the Cpeptide level was 1.43 mmol/l (normal
0.99 mmol/l). The white blood cell count
was 7,500 cells/mm3 with a normal differential. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was
33 mm/h and the C-reactive protein 2.0
mg/l (normal 2.0 mg/l). Repeated levels of
creatine kinase, coagulation tests, and creatinine levels were normal. Cerebrospinal fluid
showed normal protein content and cell

count. Standard motor nerve conduction
and F-wave studies of bilateral deep peroneal and tibial nerves were normal. Sensory nerve conduction studies of both sural
nerves showed reduced action potential
amplitudes and normal nerve conduction
velocities. Concentric needle electromyography (EMG) of the right anterior tibial
muscle displayed severe fibrillations and
positive sharp waves (3 on a scale from 0
to 4). In contrast, there were only a few
questionable fibrillations in the extensor
hallucis longus muscle and posterior tibial
muscle, and no pathologic spontaneous
activity in the peronaeus longus, rectus
femoris, vastus medialis, gastrocnemius,
gluteus medius, and adductor longus muscles. Motor unit potentials of the anterior
tibial muscle were slightly enlarged. The
follow-up EMG examination, 8 days later,
did not show any significant change in the
distribution of the spontaneous activity,
which was still very prominent in the anterior tibial muscle and at this time not present in the posterior tibial muscle. The plain
X-ray of the leg showed no skeletal lesions.
B-mode sonography of the anterolateral leg
muscles and Doppler sonography and
duplex scanning of the lower-limb arteries
were normal. The MRI of the lumbar spine
was normal. The MRI of the right leg
showed high signal intensity of the anterior
tibial muscle (Fig. 1C), while all other peroneal muscles, as well as the gastrocnemius
muscle appeared with normal signals in the
long T2-weighted images. No abnormalities could be detected in the other tissues
such as nerves, bones, or soft tissues. In
T1-weighted images, before and after contrast enhancement, no significant signal
abnormalities were present. Inversion
recovery MRI techniques were applied to
differentiate between the fat and water contents of the muscle structure by using delay
times for the inversion pulse producing fat
and water signal suppression. These images
revealed a normal fat distribution but an
increased net-water content of the anterior
tibial muscle (Fig. 1A, 1B).
With analgesic therapy, the symptoms
gradually improved until they completely
resolved after 7 weeks. However, 7 months
later, the patient was readmitted because of
similar pain and tenderness of the anterolateral left leg. On admission, she was
unable to walk on her heels, and dorsal
extension of the foot was grade 3 MRC on
the left and 4 MRC on the right. Hyperpathia to tactile stimuli and paresthesia of
the anterolateral aspect of the left leg were
DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000


===== PDF PAGE 3 of 17 (pdftotext -layout) =====
                                                                                                                                              Letters


also found. The patient’s HbA1c was ele-          damage in accordance with other authors              3. Keller DR, Erpelding M, Grist T: Diabetic
vated to 7.9% (normal 5.7%), whereas             (3). Clinical examination and ultrasound of             muscular infarction: preventing morbidity
other routine laboratory tests were normal.       the leg arteries failed to demonstrate large            by avoiding excisional biopsy. Arch Intern
The EMG of the left anterior tibial muscle        vessel occlusion. Usually, the anterior tibial          Med 157:1611–1617, 1997
displayed moderate fibrillations and posi-        muscle is supplied by 3 or 4 branches of the         4. Umpierrez GE, Stiles RG, Kleinbart J,
                                                                                                          Krendel DA, Watts NB: Diabetic muscle
tive sharp waves (2 on a scale from 0 to         anterior tibial artery (9) that do not regu-            infarction. Am J Med 101:245–250, 1996
4), while there was no pathologic spon-          larly show up on angiography. We assume              5. Van Slyke MA, Ostrov BE: MRI evaluation
taneous activity in neighboring muscles.          that they must have been occluded in our                of diabetic muscle infarction. Magn Reson
Control EMG of the right anterior tibial          patient, as in previous autopsy studies in              Imaging 13:325–329, 1995
muscle showed enlarged polyphasic motor           patients with diabetic muscle infarction,            6. Chester CS, Banker MD: Focal infarction of
unit potentials with no signs of sponta-          extensive atherosclerosis of small muscular             muscle in diabetics. Diabetes Care 9:623–
neous activity and a severely disrupted           and intramuscular arteries has been                     630, 1986
interference pattern. This time, MRI scans        reported (6). The sensory abnormalities              7. Nunez-Hoyo M, Gardner CL, Motta AO,
of the left leg showed isolated high signal       had to be summarized under a mild                       Ashmead JW: Skeletal muscle infarction in
intensity changes of the left anterior tibial     peripheral sensory polyneuropathy as indi-              diabetes: MR findings. J Comput Assist
                                                                                                          Tomogr 17:986–988, 1993
muscle in the inversion recovery (Fig. 1D)        cated by the bilaterally low tendon reflex           8. Shields RW Jr, Root KE, Wilbourn AJ:
and T2-weighted images (Fig. 1E).                 activity in the lower limbs and abnormali-              Compartment syndromes and compres-
     In our patient with inadequately con-        ties of sensory nerve conduction.                       sion neuropathies in coma. Neurology 36:
trolled diabetes, muscle infarction was at             In summary, from the clinical history              1370–1374, 1986
both times suggested by the acute onset of        and examination, the electrodiagnostic               9. Lang J, Wachsmuth W: Bein und Statik. In
localized pain in the anterolateral leg. Sev-     findings, and, in particular, the findings of           Praktische Anatomie. Bein und Statik. Berlin,
eral weeks after onset, EMG revealed pro-         MRI, we concluded that our patient suf-                 Springer-Verlag, 1972, p. 311–313
fuse pathologic spontaneous activity con-         fered from diabetic muscle infarction of
fined to the anterior tibial muscles. Stan-       the anterior tibial muscles. According to
dard motor conduction studies of                  the literature, a contralateral recurrence is       Function of
lower-limb nerves were normal, so that a          not rare (6). Recent articles included              Pancreatic Islets
mononeuropathy of the deep or common              patients with diabetic muscle infarctions
peroneal nerve was unlikely, whereas sen-         of the legs and all involved the calves,            Isolated From a
sory nerve conduction studies were sugges-        directing attention from the thigh to other         Type 1 Diabetic
tive of mild sensory polyneuropathy. Labo-        muscular regions as potential sites of              Patient
ratory investigations of serum, including         infarction (4–7). However, to the best of
creatine-kinase and cerebrospinal fluid,          our knowledge, this is the first report to
gave no indication of ongoing inflamma-           describe isolated bilateral diabetic infarc-           n type 1 diabetes, the progressive
tion. In the absence of a history of previous
trauma or excessive exercise, a mechani-
cally induced anterior compartment syn-
drome of the leg with increased tissue pres-
                                                  tions of the anterior tibial muscles.

                                                                KONSTANTINOS SPENGOS, MD
                                                                 JOHANNES C. WÖHRLE, MD
                                                                                                      I  autoimmune destruction of the pancre-
                                                                                                         atic -cells leads to insulin deficiency,
                                                                                                      with reduced or absent response to glucose
                                                                                                      and nonglucose stimuli. An additional hor-
sure resulting in ischemia seemed unlikely.                          JOHANNES BINDER, MD              monal defect involves glucagon secretion.
Also, typical features of anterior compart-                        ANDREAS SCHWARTZ, MD               This includes loss of glucose-induced sup-
ment syndrome, such as involvement of the                          MICHAEL HENNERICI, MD              pression of glucagon secretion and exag-
anterior tibial muscle and the peroneal                                                               gerated increase of glucagon in response to
muscles, swelling of the leg and an electri-      From the Department of Neurology, Universitäts-     stimuli such as arginine infusion and a pro-
                                                  klinikum Mannheim, University of Heidelberg,
cally silent EMG (8), were absent in our          Mannheim, Germany.                                  tein meal. It can be corrected by restoration
patient. The MRI suggested an isolated               Address correspondence to Johannes C. Wöhrle,    of insulin levels. Not surprisingly, the infor-
lesion of both anterior tibial muscles, 4 and     MD, the Department of Neurology, Universitäts-      mation on insulin and glucagon secretion
6 weeks after onset of symptoms. There            klinikum Mannheim, University of Heidelberg,        in human type 1 diabetes has been
                                                  Theodor Kutzer Ufer, D-68135 Mannheim, Ger-
was increased signal intensity in long            many. E-mail: woehrle@neuro.ma.uni-heidelberg.de.
                                                                                                      obtained almost exclusively from in vivo
T2-weighted images and fat and water-sup-                                                             studies. To our knowledge, only 1 article
pression inversion-recovery sequences,                                                                has been published on the function of iso-
thus indicating an increased net water con-       References                                          lated type 1 diabetic islets (1). In that case,
tent of the anterior tibial muscle. These          1. Barohn RJ, Kissel JT: Case-of-the-month:        pre-proinsulin mRNA and insulin content,
findings were the morphological correlate             painful thigh mass in a young woman: dia-       as well as insulin response, were evaluated
of subacute infarction, i.e., the muscular tis-       betic muscle infarction. Muscle Nerve 15:       from isolated islets at the clinical onset of
sue was beyond the stage of contrast                  850–855, 1992                                   disease. The authors found that, although
                                                   2. Scully RE, Mark EJ, McNeely WF, Ebeling
enhancement but had not yet reached the                                                               markedly reduced, -cells were still pres-
                                                      SH, Phillips LD: Case records of the Mass-
chronic stage with formation of fatty streaks         achusetts General Hospital: weekly clini-       ent, which showed a disproportionate
or scar tissue, as described in several               copathological exercises. Case 29-1997: a       impairment of insulin release ability.
histopathological studies (1,6). We did not           54-year-old diabetic woman with pain and             Our laboratories are involved in the
supplement the imaging results by muscle              swelling of the leg. N Engl J Med 337:839–      preparation and characterization of islets of
biopsy in order to limit focal muscular               845, 1997                                       Langerhans from the pancreases of large


DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000                                                                                                       701

===== PDF PAGE 3 of 17 (reading order, same page) =====
Letters

also found. The patient’s HbA1c was elevated to 7.9% (normal 5.7%), whereas
other routine laboratory tests were normal.
The EMG of the left anterior tibial muscle
displayed moderate fibrillations and positive sharp waves (2 on a scale from 0 to
4), while there was no pathologic spontaneous activity in neighboring muscles.
Control EMG of the right anterior tibial
muscle showed enlarged polyphasic motor
unit potentials with no signs of spontaneous activity and a severely disrupted
interference pattern. This time, MRI scans
of the left leg showed isolated high signal
intensity changes of the left anterior tibial
muscle in the inversion recovery (Fig. 1D)
and T2-weighted images (Fig. 1E).
In our patient with inadequately controlled diabetes, muscle infarction was at
both times suggested by the acute onset of
localized pain in the anterolateral leg. Several weeks after onset, EMG revealed profuse pathologic spontaneous activity confined to the anterior tibial muscles. Standard motor conduction studies of
lower-limb nerves were normal, so that a
mononeuropathy of the deep or common
peroneal nerve was unlikely, whereas sensory nerve conduction studies were suggestive of mild sensory polyneuropathy. Laboratory investigations of serum, including
creatine-kinase and cerebrospinal fluid,
gave no indication of ongoing inflammation. In the absence of a history of previous
trauma or excessive exercise, a mechanically induced anterior compartment syndrome of the leg with increased tissue pressure resulting in ischemia seemed unlikely.
Also, typical features of anterior compartment syndrome, such as involvement of the
anterior tibial muscle and the peroneal
muscles, swelling of the leg and an electrically silent EMG (8), were absent in our
patient. The MRI suggested an isolated
lesion of both anterior tibial muscles, 4 and
6 weeks after onset of symptoms. There
was increased signal intensity in long
T2-weighted images and fat and water-suppression inversion-recovery sequences,
thus indicating an increased net water content of the anterior tibial muscle. These
findings were the morphological correlate
of subacute infarction, i.e., the muscular tissue was beyond the stage of contrast
enhancement but had not yet reached the
chronic stage with formation of fatty streaks
or scar tissue, as described in several
histopathological studies (1,6). We did not
supplement the imaging results by muscle
biopsy in order to limit focal muscular
DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000

damage in accordance with other authors
(3). Clinical examination and ultrasound of
the leg arteries failed to demonstrate large
vessel occlusion. Usually, the anterior tibial
muscle is supplied by 3 or 4 branches of the
anterior tibial artery (9) that do not regularly show up on angiography. We assume
that they must have been occluded in our
patient, as in previous autopsy studies in
patients with diabetic muscle infarction,
extensive atherosclerosis of small muscular
and intramuscular arteries has been
reported (6). The sensory abnormalities
had to be summarized under a mild
peripheral sensory polyneuropathy as indicated by the bilaterally low tendon reflex
activity in the lower limbs and abnormalities of sensory nerve conduction.
In summary, from the clinical history
and examination, the electrodiagnostic
findings, and, in particular, the findings of
MRI, we concluded that our patient suffered from diabetic muscle infarction of
the anterior tibial muscles. According to
the literature, a contralateral recurrence is
not rare (6). Recent articles included
patients with diabetic muscle infarctions
of the legs and all involved the calves,
directing attention from the thigh to other
muscular regions as potential sites of
infarction (4–7). However, to the best of
our knowledge, this is the first report to
describe isolated bilateral diabetic infarctions of the anterior tibial muscles.
KONSTANTINOS SPENGOS, MD
JOHANNES C. WÖHRLE, MD
JOHANNES BINDER, MD
ANDREAS SCHWARTZ, MD
MICHAEL HENNERICI, MD
From the Department of Neurology, Universitätsklinikum Mannheim, University of Heidelberg,
Mannheim, Germany.
Address correspondence to Johannes C. Wöhrle,
MD, the Department of Neurology, Universitätsklinikum Mannheim, University of Heidelberg,
Theodor Kutzer Ufer, D-68135 Mannheim, Germany. E-mail: woehrle@neuro.ma.uni-heidelberg.de.

References
1. Barohn RJ, Kissel JT: Case-of-the-month:
painful thigh mass in a young woman: diabetic muscle infarction. Muscle Nerve 15:
850–855, 1992
2. Scully RE, Mark EJ, McNeely WF, Ebeling
SH, Phillips LD: Case records of the Massachusetts General Hospital: weekly clinicopathological exercises. Case 29-1997: a
54-year-old diabetic woman with pain and
swelling of the leg. N Engl J Med 337:839–
845, 1997

3. Keller DR, Erpelding M, Grist T: Diabetic
muscular infarction: preventing morbidity
by avoiding excisional biopsy. Arch Intern
Med 157:1611–1617, 1997
4. Umpierrez GE, Stiles RG, Kleinbart J,
Krendel DA, Watts NB: Diabetic muscle
infarction. Am J Med 101:245–250, 1996
5. Van Slyke MA, Ostrov BE: MRI evaluation
of diabetic muscle infarction. Magn Reson
Imaging 13:325–329, 1995
6. Chester CS, Banker MD: Focal infarction of
muscle in diabetics. Diabetes Care 9:623–
630, 1986
7. Nunez-Hoyo M, Gardner CL, Motta AO,
Ashmead JW: Skeletal muscle infarction in
diabetes: MR findings. J Comput Assist
Tomogr 17:986–988, 1993
8. Shields RW Jr, Root KE, Wilbourn AJ:
Compartment syndromes and compression neuropathies in coma. Neurology 36:
1370–1374, 1986
9. Lang J, Wachsmuth W: Bein und Statik. In
Praktische Anatomie. Bein und Statik. Berlin,
Springer-Verlag, 1972, p. 311–313

Function of
Pancreatic Islets
Isolated From a
Type 1 Diabetic
Patient
n type 1 diabetes, the progressive
autoimmune destruction of the pancreatic -cells leads to insulin deficiency,
with reduced or absent response to glucose
and nonglucose stimuli. An additional hormonal defect involves glucagon secretion.
This includes loss of glucose-induced suppression of glucagon secretion and exaggerated increase of glucagon in response to
stimuli such as arginine infusion and a protein meal. It can be corrected by restoration
of insulin levels. Not surprisingly, the information on insulin and glucagon secretion
in human type 1 diabetes has been
obtained almost exclusively from in vivo
studies. To our knowledge, only 1 article
has been published on the function of isolated type 1 diabetic islets (1). In that case,
pre-proinsulin mRNA and insulin content,
as well as insulin response, were evaluated
from isolated islets at the clinical onset of
disease. The authors found that, although
markedly reduced, -cells were still present, which showed a disproportionate
impairment of insulin release ability.
Our laboratories are involved in the
preparation and characterization of islets of
Langerhans from the pancreases of large

I

701


===== PDF PAGE 4 of 17 (pdftotext -layout) =====
Letters


mammals and people (2,3). We received
the pancreas of P.E., a young type 1 diabetic
patient, who was a multiorgan donor, and
had died accidentally, 8 months after the
diagnosis of type 1 diabetes. This provided
us the unique opportunity to study some of
the functional properties of the islets iso-
lated from a type 1 diabetes pancreas, at a
few months from clinical onset of disease.
     P.E. was a 14–year-old type 1 diabetic
girl. Eight months before the car accident
that caused her death, she had been
admitted to an emergency medicine clinic
because of a coma of unknown origin, and
the diagnosis of diabetic ketoacidosis was
soon made. After a full recovery, she was
followed by a pediatric diabetologist, who
confirmed the diagnosis of type 1 diabetes
by demonstrating the presence of positiv-
ity for HLA-DR3, high titer of islet cell
antibody, anti-GAD, and anti-IA2 antibod-
ies, and low levels of plasma C-peptide.
Diabetes control was maintained fair
(HbA1c levels 8%) by 0.4 U/kg body               Figure 1—Insulin release from human islets isolated from diabetic (—) and control donors (•••).
                                                   Preparations were perifused with 10-min pulses of varying glucose concentrations with or without 5
wt of insulin, given daily through 3 sepa-
                                                   mmol/l arginine.
rate injections. After the car accident, and
after brain death was confirmed, her par-
ents agreed to organ donation.                     betic pancreas was 76% of the values mea-           lower from type 1 islets (respectively 1.6 ±
     The islets were prepared in the labora-       sured in control cells (4.8 vs. 6.3%).              0.3 and 1.9 ± 0.2%) than from control cells
tory in Pisa, Italy, by collagenase digestion           By the perifusion experiments, the             (respectively 2.6 ± 0.6 and 3.0 ± 0.2%).
and density gradient purification (2,4).           first-phase insulin release was analyzed            After 17 days of culture, the difference at
Aliquots of the final preparation were sent        and the data were expressed as function of          high glucose was not observed (high glu-
to Brussels for the evaluation of insulin          insulin content (Fig. 1). The basal insulin         cose plus IBMX was not tested); insulin
synthesis and to perform perifusion exper-         discharge from diabetic -cells was com-            secretion, normalized for insulin content,
iments, as previously described (5). The           parable to that from control preparations,          was 7.8 ± 1.2% from diabetic islets and 6.5
other studies were performed in Pisa and           whereas their glucose-stimulated activity           ± 0.5% from control islets.
Rome, according to previously reported             was markedly reduced. The diabetic islets                The release of glucagon (pg/ml, mean ±
procedures (2,4). The results were com-            did not respond to 5 mmol/l glucose,                SD of 4 to 5 determinations) from both
pared with those generated with the islets         whereas control cells were stimulated               shortly prepared and cultured type 1 dia-
prepared from the pancreas of a 25-year-           4-fold; their secretory activity increased          betic islets was similar at 3.3 (respectively
old woman. Also in this case, the cause of         2- to 3-fold at 10 and 20 mmol/l glucose,           20.6 ± 1.2 and 20.3 ± 1.1) and 16.7 (19.9 ±
death had been a car accident, and we iso-         but their maximal activity was still 4-fold         1.6 and 20.9 ± 1.8) mmol/l glucose,
lated the islets 2 days after the type 1 dia-      lower than that of control values. This             whereas the control islets showed a reduc-
betic pancreas processing. The methods             reduced glucose responsiveness could not            tion of glucagon release (20%) in
used were the same and the final purity            be corrected by the addition of arginine.           response to high glucose (5-day cultured
was 90%.                                               The static incubation experiments              islets: 21.8 ± 1.4 at 3.3 mmol/l glucose and
     During the isolation process, the islets      (mean ± SD of 4 to 5 determinations) were           17.6 ± 1.5 at 16.7 mmol/l glucose; 17-day
from the type 1 diabetic patient appeared          performed after 5 and 17 days of isolation,         cultured islets: 22.4 ± 0.9 at 3.3 mmol/l glu-
as discrete round or oval structures that          with the islets kept under standardized cul-        cose and 16.8 ± 0.2 at 16.7 mmol/l glucose).
could be identified by dithizone staining.         ture conditions (2,4). Shortly after the isola-     The addition of arginine to 3.3 mmol/l glu-
At the end of the isolation and purifica-          tion, insulin release (expressed as percent of      cose caused a similar increase of glucagon
tion procedures, the purity of the islets, as      insulin content) in response to 3.3 mmol/l          release from both diabetic (25.2 ± 4.0 and
roughly estimated by dithizone staining,           glucose and 3.3 mmol/l glucose  20                 31.6 ± 8.7, respectively, from 5- and
was 60%.                                          mmol/l arginine was similar in control              17-day cultured cells), and control (33.1 ±
     After 5 days of isolation, the insulin syn-   (respectively 1.0 ± 0.2 and 1.7 ± 0.4%) and         6.2 and 26 ± 1.3, respectively, from 5- and
thetic activity was measured during a 2-h          type 1 (respectively 1.2 ± 0.4 and 1.5 ±            17-day cultured cells) islets.
incubation at 10 mmol/l glucose. When              0.3%) islets, whereas the secretion of the               In the present study, the hormonal
expressed as a function of corresponding           hormone in response to 16.7 mmol/l glu-             function of islets prepared from type 1
insulin content, the rate of glucose-induced       cose and 16.7 mmol/l glucose plus 1 mmol/l          diabetic patient a few months from the
insulin synthesis in -cells from the dia-         3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX) was              onset of disease is reported for the first


702                                                                                                  DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000

===== PDF PAGE 4 of 17 (reading order, same page) =====
Letters

mammals and people (2,3). We received
the pancreas of P.E., a young type 1 diabetic
patient, who was a multiorgan donor, and
had died accidentally, 8 months after the
diagnosis of type 1 diabetes. This provided
us the unique opportunity to study some of
the functional properties of the islets isolated from a type 1 diabetes pancreas, at a
few months from clinical onset of disease.
P.E. was a 14–year-old type 1 diabetic
girl. Eight months before the car accident
that caused her death, she had been
admitted to an emergency medicine clinic
because of a coma of unknown origin, and
the diagnosis of diabetic ketoacidosis was
soon made. After a full recovery, she was
followed by a pediatric diabetologist, who
confirmed the diagnosis of type 1 diabetes
by demonstrating the presence of positivity for HLA-DR3, high titer of islet cell
antibody, anti-GAD, and anti-IA2 antibodies, and low levels of plasma C-peptide.
Diabetes control was maintained fair
(HbA1c levels 8%) by 0.4 U/kg body
wt of insulin, given daily through 3 separate injections. After the car accident, and
after brain death was confirmed, her parents agreed to organ donation.
The islets were prepared in the laboratory in Pisa, Italy, by collagenase digestion
and density gradient purification (2,4).
Aliquots of the final preparation were sent
to Brussels for the evaluation of insulin
synthesis and to perform perifusion experiments, as previously described (5). The
other studies were performed in Pisa and
Rome, according to previously reported
procedures (2,4). The results were compared with those generated with the islets
prepared from the pancreas of a 25-yearold woman. Also in this case, the cause of
death had been a car accident, and we isolated the islets 2 days after the type 1 diabetic pancreas processing. The methods
used were the same and the final purity
was 90%.
During the isolation process, the islets
from the type 1 diabetic patient appeared
as discrete round or oval structures that
could be identified by dithizone staining.
At the end of the isolation and purification procedures, the purity of the islets, as
roughly estimated by dithizone staining,
was 60%.
After 5 days of isolation, the insulin synthetic activity was measured during a 2-h
incubation at 10 mmol/l glucose. When
expressed as a function of corresponding
insulin content, the rate of glucose-induced
insulin synthesis in -cells from the dia702

Figure 1—Insulin release from human islets isolated from diabetic (—) and control donors (•••).
Preparations were perifused with 10-min pulses of varying glucose concentrations with or without 5
mmol/l arginine.

betic pancreas was 76% of the values measured in control cells (4.8 vs. 6.3%).
By the perifusion experiments, the
first-phase insulin release was analyzed
and the data were expressed as function of
insulin content (Fig. 1). The basal insulin
discharge from diabetic -cells was comparable to that from control preparations,
whereas their glucose-stimulated activity
was markedly reduced. The diabetic islets
did not respond to 5 mmol/l glucose,
whereas control cells were stimulated
4-fold; their secretory activity increased
2- to 3-fold at 10 and 20 mmol/l glucose,
but their maximal activity was still 4-fold
lower than that of control values. This
reduced glucose responsiveness could not
be corrected by the addition of arginine.
The static incubation experiments
(mean ± SD of 4 to 5 determinations) were
performed after 5 and 17 days of isolation,
with the islets kept under standardized culture conditions (2,4). Shortly after the isolation, insulin release (expressed as percent of
insulin content) in response to 3.3 mmol/l
glucose and 3.3 mmol/l glucose  20
mmol/l arginine was similar in control
(respectively 1.0 ± 0.2 and 1.7 ± 0.4%) and
type 1 (respectively 1.2 ± 0.4 and 1.5 ±
0.3%) islets, whereas the secretion of the
hormone in response to 16.7 mmol/l glucose and 16.7 mmol/l glucose plus 1 mmol/l
3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX) was

lower from type 1 islets (respectively 1.6 ±
0.3 and 1.9 ± 0.2%) than from control cells
(respectively 2.6 ± 0.6 and 3.0 ± 0.2%).
After 17 days of culture, the difference at
high glucose was not observed (high glucose plus IBMX was not tested); insulin
secretion, normalized for insulin content,
was 7.8 ± 1.2% from diabetic islets and 6.5
± 0.5% from control islets.
The release of glucagon (pg/ml, mean ±
SD of 4 to 5 determinations) from both
shortly prepared and cultured type 1 diabetic islets was similar at 3.3 (respectively
20.6 ± 1.2 and 20.3 ± 1.1) and 16.7 (19.9 ±
1.6 and 20.9 ± 1.8) mmol/l glucose,
whereas the control islets showed a reduction of glucagon release (20%) in
response to high glucose (5-day cultured
islets: 21.8 ± 1.4 at 3.3 mmol/l glucose and
17.6 ± 1.5 at 16.7 mmol/l glucose; 17-day
cultured islets: 22.4 ± 0.9 at 3.3 mmol/l glucose and 16.8 ± 0.2 at 16.7 mmol/l glucose).
The addition of arginine to 3.3 mmol/l glucose caused a similar increase of glucagon
release from both diabetic (25.2 ± 4.0 and
31.6 ± 8.7, respectively, from 5- and
17-day cultured cells), and control (33.1 ±
6.2 and 26 ± 1.3, respectively, from 5- and
17-day cultured cells) islets.
In the present study, the hormonal
function of islets prepared from type 1
diabetic patient a few months from the
onset of disease is reported for the first
DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000


===== PDF PAGE 5 of 17 (pdftotext -layout) =====
                                                                                                                                                 Letters


time. In these islets, 8 months after the          From the Department of Endocrinology and Metab-              atic islets isolated from NOD mice during
diagnosis of diabetes, some residual cells         olism (P.M., R.L., S.D.G., L.M., R.N.), Metabolic            the phase preceding insulin-dependent
                                                   Unit, University of Pisa, Pisa; the Department of            diabetes mellitus. J Clin Invest 85:1944–
capable of insulin synthesis and secretion         Endocrinology (F.D., C.S., M.R., U.D.M.), Second             1950, 1990
were still present.                                Medical Clinic, “La Sapienza” University, Rome,
     Our results confirm in vivo data show-                                                                  7. Ishida K, Mizuno A, Sano T, Shi K, Shima
                                                   Italy; and the Beta-Cell Transplant Unit (Z.L.), Vrije
                                                                                                                K: Plasma glucagon responses to insulin-
ing that the defects of insulin release in this    Universiteit, Brussels, Belgium.
                                                                                                                induced hypolgycemia and arginine in
type of diabetes are mainly quantitative               Address correspondence to Piero Marchetti,
                                                   MD, Department of Endocrinology and Metabo-                  spontaneous non-insulin-dependent dia-
and involve a wide range of insulinotropic         lism, Metabolic Unit, Ospedale Cisanello, Via Par-           betes mellitus rats, Otsuka Long Evans
agents. Interestingly, we found that the           adisa 2, 56100 Pisa, Italy. E-mail: marchant@immr.           Tokushima Fatty (OLEFT) strain. Acta
characteristics of insulin release of type 1       med.unipi.it.                                                Endocrinol (Copenh) 129:585–593, 1993
diabetic islets seemed to improve after a
period of culture. This is in agreement with       Acknowledgments — This work was sup-
previous data obtained with islets prepared        ported by grants from the Italian National               Circulating Levels of
from NOD mice, showing reversal of glu-            Research Council, Ministero Università e                 Coagulation Factor
cose-induced insulin release suppression           Ricerca Scientifica e Tecnologica, Regione
after 7 days of culture (6). In that case,         Toscana, the European Community (BMH1-                   XIII in Subjects With
removal of intra-islet inflammatory cells          CT92–0805, BMH4-CT95–1561), the Min-
                                                   istry of Scientific Policy (CE-03–001), the
                                                                                                            Type 2 Diabetes and
was considered as the factor leading to the
improved -cell function. Our results sug-         Flemish Community (93/019), Biomed, and                  in Their First-Degree
gest that some of the alterations observed
                                                   the Juvenile Diabetes Foundation Interna-
                                                   tional (DIRP 995004).
                                                                                                            Relatives
were due, at least in part, to the native type 1       The authors thank Renè De Proft, Lutgart
islet environment.                                                                                                oagulation factor XIII (FXIII) circu-

                                                                                                            C
                                                   Heylen, Gabriel Schoonjans, and Luc Bouwens
     A loss of glucose-modulated glucagon          for technical assistance.                                      lates in plasma as an inactive
secretion and a maintained sensitivity to                                                                         tetramer of 2 A- (catalytic) and 2
arginine have been observed in models of                                                                    B- (carrier) subunits. When activated by
both type 1 and type 2 diabetes (7), sug-          References                                               thrombin, it catalyzes the cross-linking of
gesting that the defect of glucagon release         1. Conget I, Fernadez-Alvarez J, Ferrer J,              fibrin chains and 2-antiplasmin to fibrin
is mainly due to the diminished insulin                Sarri Y, Novials A, Somoza N, Pujol-Borrel           (1), thereby increasing the mechanical
levels. In our experiments, glucagon                   R, Casamitjana R, Gomis R: Human pan-                strength and fibrinolytic resistance of fib-
release from the diabetic islets was similar           creatic islet function at the onset of type 1        rin clot. A functional role for FXIII in
at 3.3 as 16.7 mmol/l glucose and the                  (insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus.               thrombotic disease is suggested by the
reduced suppression by high glucose did                Diabetologia 36:358–360, 1993                        finding that the Leu allele at the common
not change upon culture. On the other               2. Marchetti P, Giannarelli R, Cosimi S,                Val34Leu polymorphism in the FXIII
hand, in the presence of arginine, a similar           Masiello P, Coppelli A, Viacava P, Navalesi          A-subunit gene appears to protect against
                                                       R: Massive isolation, morphological and
increase of glucagon secretion was                     functional characterization, and xeno-
                                                                                                            both myocardial infarction and venous
observed from both diabetic and control                transplantation of bovine pancreatic islets.         thromboembolism (2,3).
islets. Thus, the decreased insulin output             Diabetes 44:375–381, 1995                                 We compared 173 subjects with type 2
from our type 1 diabetes islets was paral-          3. Keymeulen B, Ling Z, Gorus FK, Delvaux               diabetes (48 treated with diet alone, 6
leled by minor derangements of glucagon                G, Bouwens L, Grupping A, Hendrieckx                 treated with insulin, 21 treated with met-
release.                                               C, Pipeleers-Marichal M, Van Schraven-               formin, 73 treated with sulfonylurea, and
     The persistence of some insulin syn-              dijk C, Salmela K, Pipeleers DG: Implanta-           25 treated with combined sulfonylurea
thetic and secretory function, even a few              tion of standardized beta-cell graft in a            and metformin therapy) with a group of
months after the onset of diabetes, and the            liver segment of IDDM patients: graft and            110 nondiabetic healthy control subjects
improvement of insulin secretion character-            recipient characteristics in two cases of            of similar age (mean age 63 years). Addi-
                                                       insulin-independence under maintainance
istics after removal of the islets from their          immunosuppression for prior kidney
                                                                                                            tionally, 132 first-degree relatives (44 sib-
native environment support the search for              graft. Diabetologia 41:452–459, 1998                 lings, 77 children, and 4 parents) of sub-
strategies aimed to allow the diagnosis and         4. Pupilli C, Giannini S, Marchetti P, Lupi R,          jects with type 2 diabetes were compared
treatment of type 1 diabetes as early as pos-          Antonelli A, Malavasi F, Takasawa S,                 with a second control group of 151
sible in the natural history of the disease.           Okamoto H, Ferrannini E: Autoantibodies              healthy subjects of similar age (mean ages
                                                       to CD38 (ADP-ribosyl cyclase/cyclic ADP-             45 and 47 years, respectively). All of the
                    PIERO MARCHETTI, MD                ribose hydrolase) in Caucasian patients              subjects had been recruited for earlier
                   FRANCESCO DOTTA, MD                 with diabetes: effects on insulin release            hemostasis studies (4,5).
                      ZHIDONG LING, PHD                from human islet cells. Diabetes 48:2309–                 Circulating levels of FXIII were mea-
                       ROBERTO LUPI, PHD               2315, 1999                                           sured in citrated plasma samples. FXIII A-
                                                    5. Ling Z, Pipeleers D: Prolonged exposure of
                 SILVIA DEL GUERRA, PHD                human beta-cells to elevated glucose levels
                                                                                                            and B-subunit antigen levels were mea-
               CARMELA SANTANGELO, PHD                 results in sustained cellular activation with        sured by use of a sandwich enzyme-linked
                 MASSIMO REALACCI, PHD                 a loss of glucose regulation. J Clin Invest          immunosorbent assay method (6), and
                   LORELLA MARSELLI, MD                98:2805–2812, 1996                                   FXIII activity was measured by a sensitive
                  UMBERTO DI MARIO, MD              6. Strandell E, Eizirik DL, Sandler S: Reversal         microtiter assay using fibrinogen and
                     RENZO NAVALESI, MD                of beta-cell suppression in vitro in pancre-         5-(biotinamido)pentylamine (6). Geno-


DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000                                                                                                         703

===== PDF PAGE 5 of 17 (reading order, same page) =====
Letters

time. In these islets, 8 months after the
diagnosis of diabetes, some residual cells
capable of insulin synthesis and secretion
were still present.
Our results confirm in vivo data showing that the defects of insulin release in this
type of diabetes are mainly quantitative
and involve a wide range of insulinotropic
agents. Interestingly, we found that the
characteristics of insulin release of type 1
diabetic islets seemed to improve after a
period of culture. This is in agreement with
previous data obtained with islets prepared
from NOD mice, showing reversal of glucose-induced insulin release suppression
after 7 days of culture (6). In that case,
removal of intra-islet inflammatory cells
was considered as the factor leading to the
improved -cell function. Our results suggest that some of the alterations observed
were due, at least in part, to the native type 1
islet environment.
A loss of glucose-modulated glucagon
secretion and a maintained sensitivity to
arginine have been observed in models of
both type 1 and type 2 diabetes (7), suggesting that the defect of glucagon release
is mainly due to the diminished insulin
levels. In our experiments, glucagon
release from the diabetic islets was similar
at 3.3 as 16.7 mmol/l glucose and the
reduced suppression by high glucose did
not change upon culture. On the other
hand, in the presence of arginine, a similar
increase of glucagon secretion was
observed from both diabetic and control
islets. Thus, the decreased insulin output
from our type 1 diabetes islets was paralleled by minor derangements of glucagon
release.
The persistence of some insulin synthetic and secretory function, even a few
months after the onset of diabetes, and the
improvement of insulin secretion characteristics after removal of the islets from their
native environment support the search for
strategies aimed to allow the diagnosis and
treatment of type 1 diabetes as early as possible in the natural history of the disease.
PIERO MARCHETTI, MD
FRANCESCO DOTTA, MD
ZHIDONG LING, PHD
ROBERTO LUPI, PHD
SILVIA DEL GUERRA, PHD
CARMELA SANTANGELO, PHD
MASSIMO REALACCI, PHD
LORELLA MARSELLI, MD
UMBERTO DI MARIO, MD
RENZO NAVALESI, MD
DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000

From the Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism (P.M., R.L., S.D.G., L.M., R.N.), Metabolic
Unit, University of Pisa, Pisa; the Department of
Endocrinology (F.D., C.S., M.R., U.D.M.), Second
Medical Clinic, “La Sapienza” University, Rome,
Italy; and the Beta-Cell Transplant Unit (Z.L.), Vrije
Universiteit, Brussels, Belgium.
Address correspondence to Piero Marchetti,
MD, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Metabolic Unit, Ospedale Cisanello, Via Paradisa 2, 56100 Pisa, Italy. E-mail: marchant@immr.
med.unipi.it.

atic islets isolated from NOD mice during
the phase preceding insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus. J Clin Invest 85:1944–
1950, 1990
7. Ishida K, Mizuno A, Sano T, Shi K, Shima
K: Plasma glucagon responses to insulininduced hypolgycemia and arginine in
spontaneous non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus rats, Otsuka Long Evans
Tokushima Fatty (OLEFT) strain. Acta
Endocrinol (Copenh) 129:585–593, 1993

Acknowledgments — This work was supported by grants from the Italian National
Research Council, Ministero Università e
Ricerca Scientifica e Tecnologica, Regione
Toscana, the European Community (BMH1CT92–0805, BMH4-CT95–1561), the Ministry of Scientific Policy (CE-03–001), the
Flemish Community (93/019), Biomed, and
the Juvenile Diabetes Foundation International (DIRP 995004).
The authors thank Renè De Proft, Lutgart
Heylen, Gabriel Schoonjans, and Luc Bouwens
for technical assistance.

Circulating Levels of
Coagulation Factor
XIII in Subjects With
Type 2 Diabetes and
in Their First-Degree
Relatives

References
1. Conget I, Fernadez-Alvarez J, Ferrer J,
Sarri Y, Novials A, Somoza N, Pujol-Borrel
R, Casamitjana R, Gomis R: Human pancreatic islet function at the onset of type 1
(insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus.
Diabetologia 36:358–360, 1993
2. Marchetti P, Giannarelli R, Cosimi S,
Masiello P, Coppelli A, Viacava P, Navalesi
R: Massive isolation, morphological and
functional characterization, and xenotransplantation of bovine pancreatic islets.
Diabetes 44:375–381, 1995
3. Keymeulen B, Ling Z, Gorus FK, Delvaux
G, Bouwens L, Grupping A, Hendrieckx
C, Pipeleers-Marichal M, Van Schravendijk C, Salmela K, Pipeleers DG: Implantation of standardized beta-cell graft in a
liver segment of IDDM patients: graft and
recipient characteristics in two cases of
insulin-independence under maintainance
immunosuppression for prior kidney
graft. Diabetologia 41:452–459, 1998
4. Pupilli C, Giannini S, Marchetti P, Lupi R,
Antonelli A, Malavasi F, Takasawa S,
Okamoto H, Ferrannini E: Autoantibodies
to CD38 (ADP-ribosyl cyclase/cyclic ADPribose hydrolase) in Caucasian patients
with diabetes: effects on insulin release
from human islet cells. Diabetes 48:2309–
2315, 1999
5. Ling Z, Pipeleers D: Prolonged exposure of
human beta-cells to elevated glucose levels
results in sustained cellular activation with
a loss of glucose regulation. J Clin Invest
98:2805–2812, 1996
6. Strandell E, Eizirik DL, Sandler S: Reversal
of beta-cell suppression in vitro in pancre-

oagulation factor XIII (FXIII) circulates in plasma as an inactive
tetramer of 2 A- (catalytic) and 2
B- (carrier) subunits. When activated by
thrombin, it catalyzes the cross-linking of
fibrin chains and 2-antiplasmin to fibrin
(1), thereby increasing the mechanical
strength and fibrinolytic resistance of fibrin clot. A functional role for FXIII in
thrombotic disease is suggested by the
finding that the Leu allele at the common
Val34Leu polymorphism in the FXIII
A-subunit gene appears to protect against
both myocardial infarction and venous
thromboembolism (2,3).
We compared 173 subjects with type 2
diabetes (48 treated with diet alone, 6
treated with insulin, 21 treated with metformin, 73 treated with sulfonylurea, and
25 treated with combined sulfonylurea
and metformin therapy) with a group of
110 nondiabetic healthy control subjects
of similar age (mean age 63 years). Additionally, 132 first-degree relatives (44 siblings, 77 children, and 4 parents) of subjects with type 2 diabetes were compared
with a second control group of 151
healthy subjects of similar age (mean ages
45 and 47 years, respectively). All of the
subjects had been recruited for earlier
hemostasis studies (4,5).
Circulating levels of FXIII were measured in citrated plasma samples. FXIII Aand B-subunit antigen levels were measured by use of a sandwich enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay method (6), and
FXIII activity was measured by a sensitive
microtiter assay using fibrinogen and
5-(biotinamido)pentylamine (6). Geno-

C

703


===== PDF PAGE 6 of 17 (pdftotext -layout) =====
Letters


type at the FXIII codon34 (Val34Leu)                   These findings suggest that elevated           From the Academic Unit of Molecular Vascular
polymorphism was determined by use of a           levels of FXIII A-subunit may precede the           Medicine, University of Leeds, Leeds, U.K.
                                                                                                          Address correspondence to Michael W. Mans-
previously described method (3).                  development of diabetes and arise through           field, DM, MRCP, Academic Unit of Molecular Vas-
     Mean (± SD) circulating levels of FXIII      some mechanism(s) shared with those that            cular Medicine, G-Floor, Martin Wing, General
A-subunit antigen and B-subunit antigen           contribute to the familial predisposition to        Infirmary at Leeds, Leeds LS1 3EX, U.K. E-mail:
were higher in diabetic subjects than in          type 2 diabetes. It is not clear what that          m.w.mansfield@leeds.ac.uk.
control subjects (117 ± 29 vs. 98 ± 27%           mechanism may be. There was no associa-
and 125 ± 26 vs. 109 ± 26%, respectively),        tion between the A-subunit level and the
and these differences remained after              fasting glucose level, the HbA1c level, or any      Acknowledgments — This study was sup-
adjustments for age, sex, BMI, smoking            measured metabolic feature of diabetes, its         ported by the British Heart Foundation.
habit, and fibrinogen levels; the adjusted        vascular complications, or its treatment.           H.P.K. has received funds from the Swiss
                                                                                                      Foundation for medical-biological grants.
mean values were 120 vs. 96% for the              However, it is possible that raised FXIII
A-subunit and 126 vs. 109% for the                A-subunit levels may be an early marker of
B-subunit (P  0.0005 for each compari-           subclinical vascular damage.
                                                                                                      References
son). In contrast, the levels of FXIII cross-          FXIII A-subunits circulate only in              1. Greenberg CS, Birckbichler PJ, Rice RH:
linking activity were not different between       FXIII tetramer, whereas B-subunits circu-               Transglutaminases: multifunctional cross-
the type 2 diabetic subjects and the control      late in both tetrameric and free dimeric                linking enzymes that stabilize tissues.
subjects (104 ± 33 vs. 101 ± 37%). Levels         forms. This distinction and the differing               FASEB J 5:3071–3077, 1991
of FXIII in diabetic subjects were not            sites of synthesis of the 2 subunits (8) may         2. Catto AJ, Kohler HP, Coore J, Mansfield
altered by exclusion of those subjects with       account for the difference in findings for              MW, Stickland MH, Grant PJ: Association
a clinical history of coronary artery disease,    levels of A- and B-subunits across the                  of a common polymorphism in the factor
cerebrovascular disease, peripheral vascu-        groups studied. Furthermore, the consis-                XIII gene with venous thrombosis. Blood
lar disease, or diabetic retinopathy, and lev-    tency of the correlation between circulat-              93:906–908, 1999
els of FXIII showed no heterogeneity across       ing levels of FXIII B-subunit antigen and            3. Kohler HP, Stickland MH, Ossei-Gerning
                                                                                                          N, Carter A, Grant PJ: Association of a
antidiabetic treatment groups.                    other cardiovascular risk markers raises                common polymorphism in the factor XIII
     In relatives of subjects with type 2 dia-    the possibility of an underlying associa-               gene with myocardial infarction. Thromb
betes, mean levels of FXIII A-subunit were        tion with insulin resistance. However, if               Haemost 79:8–13, 1998
higher than those in control subjects (116        there is a functional significance of                4. Mansfield MW, Heywood DM, Grant PJ:
± 38 vs. 103 ± 29%, respectively, P              increased FXIII B-subunit levels, it has yet            Sex differences in coagulation and fibrinol-
0.001), and this difference remained after        to be elucidated.                                       ysis in white subjects with non-insulin-
adjustment for age, sex, BMI, smoking                  Despite the clear differences in levels of         dependent diabetes mellitus. Arterioscler
habit, and fibrinogen level (117 vs. 106%,        FXIII subunit antigens, there was no differ-            Thromb Vasc Biol 16:160–164, 1996
respectively, P = 0.012). However, levels of      ence in the levels of FXIII activity between         5. Mansfield MW, Heywood D, Grant PJ: Cir-
FXIII B-subunit (110 ± 29 vs. 108 ± 361%)         diabetic subjects or first-degree relatives             culating levels of factor VII, fibrinogen,
                                                                                                          and von Willebrand factor and features of
and FXIII cross-linking activity (93 ± 37 vs.     and age-matched control subjects. It is                 insulin resistance in first-degree relatives
103 ± 41%) were not significantly different       possible that the influence of genotype at              of patients with NIDDM. Circulation 94:
between relatives and control subjects.           the Val34Leu polymorphism on FXIII                      2171–2176, 1996
     Levels of FXIII B-subunit antigen            activity levels (9,10) may have overriding           6. Ariëns RAS, Kohler HP, Mansfield MW,
showed a consistent pattern of correlation        importance, because, even after adjust-                 Grant PJ: Subunit antigen and activity lev-
with other recognized cardiovascular risk         ment for its influence, no difference was               els of coagulation factor XIII in healthy
factors (i.e., fibrinogen, factor VII coagulant   found between the subject groups. Fur-                  individuals: relationship to gender, age,
activity, cholesterol levels, triglyceride lev-   thermore, the extent to which in vitro mea-             smoking and hypertension. Arterioscler
els, and HbA1c levels [r  0.16 and P            surements of FXIII activity reflect in vivo             Thromb Vasc Biol 19:2012–2016, 1999
0.05 for each factor]). In the diabetic           physiological FXIII function is unclear.             7. Matthews DR, Hosker JP, Rudenski AS,
                                                                                                          Naylor BA, Treacher DF, Turner RC:
patients and relative groups, there was also           In conclusion, levels of FXIII A- and              Homeostasis model assessment: insulin
a significant correlation of levels of FXIII      B-subunit antigen are elevated in subjects              resistance and -cell function from fasting
B-subunit with insulin, homeostasis model         with type 2 diabetes, and levels of FXIII               plasma glucose and insulin concentrations
assessment insulin resistance (7), and PAI-1      A-subunit antigen are elevated in relatives             in man. Diabetologia 28:412–419, 1985
levels (r = 0.16, P 0.05). FXIII A-subunit       of subjects with type 2 diabetes. Levels of          8. Schmeling A, Bockholdt B, Schroder H,
antigen levels were correlated with levels of     FXIII B-subunit antigen show a consistent               Geserick G: Phenotype change in poly-
fibrinogen only (r = 0.25, P = 0.001) in the      pattern of correlation with other vascular              morphic plasma proteins following liver
diabetic patients and in the younger control      risk markers, which supports the possibil-              transplantation. Exp Clin Immunogenet 13:
group (r = 0.23, P = 0.008).                      ity of an underlying association with                   78–83, 1996
     Factor XIII activity levels rose as the      insulin resistance.                                  9. Kangsadalampai S, Board PG: The Val34Leu
                                                                                                          polymorphism in the A subunit of coagu-
number of Leu alleles increased at the                                                                    lation factor XIII contributes to the large
FXIII codon34 (Val34Leu) polymorphism                   MICHAEL W. MANSFIELD, DM, MRCP                    normal range in activity and demonstrates
in each group. There was no consistent                              HANS P. KOHLER, MD                    that the activation peptide plays a role in
pattern of association of the Val34Leu                         ROBERT A. S. ARIËNS, PHD                   catalytic activity. Blood 92:2766–2770,
genotype with levels of FXIII A- or B-sub-                     LYNN J. MCCORMACK, PHD                     1998
unit antigen across the groups.                                PETER J. GRANT, MD, FRCP               10. Kohler HP, Ariëns RAS, Whitaker P, Grant


704                                                                                                 DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000

===== PDF PAGE 6 of 17 (reading order, same page) =====
Letters

type at the FXIII codon34 (Val34Leu)
polymorphism was determined by use of a
previously described method (3).
Mean (± SD) circulating levels of FXIII
A-subunit antigen and B-subunit antigen
were higher in diabetic subjects than in
control subjects (117 ± 29 vs. 98 ± 27%
and 125 ± 26 vs. 109 ± 26%, respectively),
and these differences remained after
adjustments for age, sex, BMI, smoking
habit, and fibrinogen levels; the adjusted
mean values were 120 vs. 96% for the
A-subunit and 126 vs. 109% for the
B-subunit (P  0.0005 for each comparison). In contrast, the levels of FXIII crosslinking activity were not different between
the type 2 diabetic subjects and the control
subjects (104 ± 33 vs. 101 ± 37%). Levels
of FXIII in diabetic subjects were not
altered by exclusion of those subjects with
a clinical history of coronary artery disease,
cerebrovascular disease, peripheral vascular disease, or diabetic retinopathy, and levels of FXIII showed no heterogeneity across
antidiabetic treatment groups.
In relatives of subjects with type 2 diabetes, mean levels of FXIII A-subunit were
higher than those in control subjects (116
± 38 vs. 103 ± 29%, respectively, P 
0.001), and this difference remained after
adjustment for age, sex, BMI, smoking
habit, and fibrinogen level (117 vs. 106%,
respectively, P = 0.012). However, levels of
FXIII B-subunit (110 ± 29 vs. 108 ± 361%)
and FXIII cross-linking activity (93 ± 37 vs.
103 ± 41%) were not significantly different
between relatives and control subjects.
Levels of FXIII B-subunit antigen
showed a consistent pattern of correlation
with other recognized cardiovascular risk
factors (i.e., fibrinogen, factor VII coagulant
activity, cholesterol levels, triglyceride levels, and HbA1c levels [r  0.16 and P 
0.05 for each factor]). In the diabetic
patients and relative groups, there was also
a significant correlation of levels of FXIII
B-subunit with insulin, homeostasis model
assessment insulin resistance (7), and PAI-1
levels (r = 0.16, P 0.05). FXIII A-subunit
antigen levels were correlated with levels of
fibrinogen only (r = 0.25, P = 0.001) in the
diabetic patients and in the younger control
group (r = 0.23, P = 0.008).
Factor XIII activity levels rose as the
number of Leu alleles increased at the
FXIII codon34 (Val34Leu) polymorphism
in each group. There was no consistent
pattern of association of the Val34Leu
genotype with levels of FXIII A- or B-subunit antigen across the groups.
704

These findings suggest that elevated
levels of FXIII A-subunit may precede the
development of diabetes and arise through
some mechanism(s) shared with those that
contribute to the familial predisposition to
type 2 diabetes. It is not clear what that
mechanism may be. There was no association between the A-subunit level and the
fasting glucose level, the HbA1c level, or any
measured metabolic feature of diabetes, its
vascular complications, or its treatment.
However, it is possible that raised FXIII
A-subunit levels may be an early marker of
subclinical vascular damage.
FXIII A-subunits circulate only in
FXIII tetramer, whereas B-subunits circulate in both tetrameric and free dimeric
forms. This distinction and the differing
sites of synthesis of the 2 subunits (8) may
account for the difference in findings for
levels of A- and B-subunits across the
groups studied. Furthermore, the consistency of the correlation between circulating levels of FXIII B-subunit antigen and
other cardiovascular risk markers raises
the possibility of an underlying association with insulin resistance. However, if
there is a functional significance of
increased FXIII B-subunit levels, it has yet
to be elucidated.
Despite the clear differences in levels of
FXIII subunit antigens, there was no difference in the levels of FXIII activity between
diabetic subjects or first-degree relatives
and age-matched control subjects. It is
possible that the influence of genotype at
the Val34Leu polymorphism on FXIII
activity levels (9,10) may have overriding
importance, because, even after adjustment for its influence, no difference was
found between the subject groups. Furthermore, the extent to which in vitro measurements of FXIII activity reflect in vivo
physiological FXIII function is unclear.
In conclusion, levels of FXIII A- and
B-subunit antigen are elevated in subjects
with type 2 diabetes, and levels of FXIII
A-subunit antigen are elevated in relatives
of subjects with type 2 diabetes. Levels of
FXIII B-subunit antigen show a consistent
pattern of correlation with other vascular
risk markers, which supports the possibility of an underlying association with
insulin resistance.
MICHAEL W. MANSFIELD, DM, MRCP
HANS P. KOHLER, MD
ROBERT A. S. ARIËNS, PHD
LYNN J. MCCORMACK, PHD
PETER J. GRANT, MD, FRCP

From the Academic Unit of Molecular Vascular
Medicine, University of Leeds, Leeds, U.K.
Address correspondence to Michael W. Mansfield, DM, MRCP, Academic Unit of Molecular Vascular Medicine, G-Floor, Martin Wing, General
Infirmary at Leeds, Leeds LS1 3EX, U.K. E-mail:
m.w.mansfield@leeds.ac.uk.

Acknowledgments — This study was supported by the British Heart Foundation.
H.P.K. has received funds from the Swiss
Foundation for medical-biological grants.

References
1. Greenberg CS, Birckbichler PJ, Rice RH:
Transglutaminases: multifunctional crosslinking enzymes that stabilize tissues.
FASEB J 5:3071–3077, 1991
2. Catto AJ, Kohler HP, Coore J, Mansfield
MW, Stickland MH, Grant PJ: Association
of a common polymorphism in the factor
XIII gene with venous thrombosis. Blood
93:906–908, 1999
3. Kohler HP, Stickland MH, Ossei-Gerning
N, Carter A, Grant PJ: Association of a
common polymorphism in the factor XIII
gene with myocardial infarction. Thromb
Haemost 79:8–13, 1998
4. Mansfield MW, Heywood DM, Grant PJ:
Sex differences in coagulation and fibrinolysis in white subjects with non-insulindependent diabetes mellitus. Arterioscler
Thromb Vasc Biol 16:160–164, 1996
5. Mansfield MW, Heywood D, Grant PJ: Circulating levels of factor VII, fibrinogen,
and von Willebrand factor and features of
insulin resistance in first-degree relatives
of patients with NIDDM. Circulation 94:
2171–2176, 1996
6. Ariëns RAS, Kohler HP, Mansfield MW,
Grant PJ: Subunit antigen and activity levels of coagulation factor XIII in healthy
individuals: relationship to gender, age,
smoking and hypertension. Arterioscler
Thromb Vasc Biol 19:2012–2016, 1999
7. Matthews DR, Hosker JP, Rudenski AS,
Naylor BA, Treacher DF, Turner RC:
Homeostasis model assessment: insulin
resistance and -cell function from fasting
plasma glucose and insulin concentrations
in man. Diabetologia 28:412–419, 1985
8. Schmeling A, Bockholdt B, Schroder H,
Geserick G: Phenotype change in polymorphic plasma proteins following liver
transplantation. Exp Clin Immunogenet 13:
78–83, 1996
9. Kangsadalampai S, Board PG: The Val34Leu
polymorphism in the A subunit of coagulation factor XIII contributes to the large
normal range in activity and demonstrates
that the activation peptide plays a role in
catalytic activity. Blood 92:2766–2770,
1998
10. Kohler HP, Ariëns RAS, Whitaker P, Grant
DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000


===== PDF PAGE 7 of 17 (pdftotext -layout) =====
                                                                                                                                           Letters


    PJ: A common coding polymorphism in         epidermal NFL was not different between          From the Third Department of Medicine (H.Y.,
    the FXIII A-subunit gene (FXIIIVal34Leu)    the 2 groups, whereas the percent change         A.H., J.M., M.T., T.K., K.M., M.H., A.K., R.K.) and
    affects cross-linking activity (Letter).                                                     the Department of Anatomy (T.M.), Shiga Univer-
                                                of dermal NFL was significantly greater in
    Thromb Haemost 80:704, 1998                                                                  sity of Medical Science, Otsu, Shiga, Japan.
                                                the ARI group (249 ± 478%) than in the               Address correspondence to Hitoshi Yasuda, MD,
                                                control group (29 ± 40%). The number             PhD, Third Department of Medicine, Shiga Univer-
                                                of patients whose percent change of der-         sity of Medical Science, Otsu, Shiga 520-2192,
Effect of Aldose                                mal NFL exceeded its mean ± 2 SD                 Japan. E-mail: hyasuda@belle.shiga-med.ac.jp.
Reductase Inhibitor                             (109%) in control group was significantly
on Cutaneous Nerve                              higher in the ARI group than in the con-
                                                                                                 References
                                                trol group (P  0.05, 8/19 vs. 1/12).
Fiber Length in                                 Ultrastructurally, the fine fibers proliferat-
                                                                                                  1. McCarthy BG, Hsieth ST, Stocks A, Hauer
                                                                                                     P, Macko C, Cornblath DR, Griffin JW,
Diabetic Patients                               ing in the upper dermis of the patients              McArthur: Cutaneus innervation in sen-
                                                with increased NFL proved to be com-                 sory neuropathies: evaluation by skin
                                                posed of an increased number of axons                biopsy. Neurology 45:1848–1855, 1995
     or the treatment of diabetic neu-          with incomplete Schwann cell coverage,

F
                                                                                                  2. Hirai A, Yasuda H, Joko M, Maeda T,
     ropathy, how to evaluate the effi-         a finding compatible with regenerating               Kikkawa R: Evaluation of diabetic neu-
     cacy of given compounds is impor-          nerve fibers.                                        ropathy through the quantitation of cuta-
tant. Although the most reliable method             The effect of ARI on the regenerative            neous nerves. J Neurol Sci 172:55–62, 2000
may be a morphological examination,             capacity of myelinated nerve fibers has           3. Sima AA, Bril V, Nathaniel V, McEwen TA,
                                                                                                     Brown MB, Lattimer SA, Greene DA: Regen-
performing a nerve biopsy is not usually        already been reported in clinical (3) and            eration and repair of myelinated fibers in
recommended for diagnosing diabetic             experimental studies (4). The present                sural nerve biopsy specimens from patients
neuropathy because it may be harmful. In        study shows that small nerve fibers,                 with diabetic neuropathy treated with
this context, skin biopsy is safe and           mainly composed of unmyelinated nerve                sorbinil. N Engl J Med 319:548–555, 1988
reproducible. In addition, since the cuta-      fibers of the sensory nerve terminal, could       4. Terada M, Yasuda H, Kikkawa R, Shigeta Y:
neous nerve is a terminal part of the sen-      also regenerate or sprout with ARI. The              Tolrestat improves nerve regeneration after
sory nerve where nerve fibers start to          possible mechanisms by which aldose                  crush injury in streptozocin-induced dia-
degenerate and readily regenerate in sen-       reductase plays a role in the pathogenesis           betic rats. Metabolism 45:1189–1195, 1996
sory neuropathies, examining cutaneous          of diabetic neuropathy may also be rele-          5. Ohi T, Saita K, Furukawa S, Ohta M,
nerves may well be rationalized to evalu-       vant to the mechanisms by which ARI                  Hayashi K, Matsukura S: Therapeutic
                                                                                                     effects of aldose reductase inhibitor on
ate the therapeutic effects of the drugs.       improves dermal nerve regeneration. In               experimental diabetic neuropathy through
Immunohistochemical analysis of dermal          addition, ARI improves decreased content             synthesis/secretion of nerve growth factor.
nerves using antibodies against protein         of nerve growth factor (NGF) in the sci-             Exp Neurol 151:215–220, 1998
gene product (PGP) 9.5, neuron specific         atic nerves of diabetic rats (5). NGF,            6. Doubleday B, Robinson PP: The role of
panaxonal marker, may be useful to eval-        which is essential for the development of            nerve growth factor in collateral reinnerva-
uate sensory neuropathies (1). We               collateral reinnervation from cutaneous              tion by cutaneous C-fibers in the rat. Brain
reported that dermal nerve fiber length         C-fibers (6), depletes keratinocytes in the          Res 593:179–184, 1992
(NFL), which was obtained by measuring          skin of diabetic patients (7) and may be          7. Anand P, Terenghi G, Warner G, Kopel-
nerve fiber PGP 9.5, immunostained, and         reversed by ARI. Unlike dermal innerva-              man P, Williams-Chestnut RE, Sinicropi
labeled with streptavidin fluorescein           tion, epidermal innervation was not                  DV: The role of endogenous nerve growth
                                                                                                     factor in human diabetic neuropathy. Nat
isothiocyanate under confocal laser scan-       improved with ARI. This finding may                  Med 2:703–707, 1996
ning microscopy, was significantly              suggest that regenerating or sprouting
shorter in diabetic patients than in con-       nerves of the dermis cannot easily enter
trol subjects (2).                              the epidermis in a diabetic state, rather        Prevalence of
     Using this technique, we evaluated         than that epidermal nerves cannot regen-
the therapeutic effect of aldose reductase      erate or sprout, since epidermal innerva-        Diabetes in Adult
inhibitor (ARI) epalrestat in 32 type 2         tion was very poor in most patients. Gly-        Patients With
diabetic patients with neuropathy. Nine-        cated basement membrane of the epider-
teen patients were treated with epalrestat      mis may prevent reinnervation of dermal
                                                                                                 Down’s Syndrome
(50 mg) 3 times per day for 13 months          nerve fibers into the epidermis.                 Living in a
(ARI group) and 12 patients served as                                                            Residential Home
control subjects (control group). At the                       HITOSHI YASUDA, MD, PHD
start of the trial, there were no significant                   AKINORI HIRAI, MD, PHD
differences between the clinical back-                                                                revious studies reported an increased

                                                                                                 P
                                                                    MARI JOKO, MD, PHD
grounds of the 2 groups. No significant                      MASAHIKO TERADA, MD, PHD                 prevalence of diabetes in patients
change in HbA1c was found in either                            TORU KAWABATA, MD, PHD                 with Down’s syndrome (1–3). These
group during the trial. Since NFL was                           KENGO MAEDA, MD, PHD             studies, however, were limited to young
highly variable but reproducible for indi-                  MASAKAZU HANEDA, MD, PHD             people with Down’s syndrome. Recently,
vidual patients, the effect of epalrestat on               ATSUNORI KASHIWAGI, MD, PHD           mortality from Down’s syndrome has
NFL was evaluated by its percent change                      TOSHIHIRO MAEDA, MD, PHD            declined, and life expectancy in Down’s
during the trial. The percent change of                       RYUICHI KIKKAWA, MD, PHD           syndrome patients has improved (4,5). It is


DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000                                                                                                   705

===== PDF PAGE 7 of 17 (reading order, same page) =====
Letters

PJ: A common coding polymorphism in
the FXIII A-subunit gene (FXIIIVal34Leu)
affects cross-linking activity (Letter).
Thromb Haemost 80:704, 1998

Effect of Aldose
Reductase Inhibitor
on Cutaneous Nerve
Fiber Length in
Diabetic Patients
or the treatment of diabetic neuropathy, how to evaluate the efficacy of given compounds is important. Although the most reliable method
may be a morphological examination,
performing a nerve biopsy is not usually
recommended for diagnosing diabetic
neuropathy because it may be harmful. In
this context, skin biopsy is safe and
reproducible. In addition, since the cutaneous nerve is a terminal part of the sensory nerve where nerve fibers start to
degenerate and readily regenerate in sensory neuropathies, examining cutaneous
nerves may well be rationalized to evaluate the therapeutic effects of the drugs.
Immunohistochemical analysis of dermal
nerves using antibodies against protein
gene product (PGP) 9.5, neuron specific
panaxonal marker, may be useful to evaluate sensory neuropathies (1). We
reported that dermal nerve fiber length
(NFL), which was obtained by measuring
nerve fiber PGP 9.5, immunostained, and
labeled with streptavidin fluorescein
isothiocyanate under confocal laser scanning microscopy, was significantly
shorter in diabetic patients than in control subjects (2).
Using this technique, we evaluated
the therapeutic effect of aldose reductase
inhibitor (ARI) epalrestat in 32 type 2
diabetic patients with neuropathy. Nineteen patients were treated with epalrestat
(50 mg) 3 times per day for 13 months
(ARI group) and 12 patients served as
control subjects (control group). At the
start of the trial, there were no significant
differences between the clinical backgrounds of the 2 groups. No significant
change in HbA1c was found in either
group during the trial. Since NFL was
highly variable but reproducible for individual patients, the effect of epalrestat on
NFL was evaluated by its percent change
during the trial. The percent change of

F

DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000

epidermal NFL was not different between
the 2 groups, whereas the percent change
of dermal NFL was significantly greater in
the ARI group (249 ± 478%) than in the
control group (29 ± 40%). The number
of patients whose percent change of dermal NFL exceeded its mean ± 2 SD
(109%) in control group was significantly
higher in the ARI group than in the control group (P  0.05, 8/19 vs. 1/12).
Ultrastructurally, the fine fibers proliferating in the upper dermis of the patients
with increased NFL proved to be composed of an increased number of axons
with incomplete Schwann cell coverage,
a finding compatible with regenerating
nerve fibers.
The effect of ARI on the regenerative
capacity of myelinated nerve fibers has
already been reported in clinical (3) and
experimental studies (4). The present
study shows that small nerve fibers,
mainly composed of unmyelinated nerve
fibers of the sensory nerve terminal, could
also regenerate or sprout with ARI. The
possible mechanisms by which aldose
reductase plays a role in the pathogenesis
of diabetic neuropathy may also be relevant to the mechanisms by which ARI
improves dermal nerve regeneration. In
addition, ARI improves decreased content
of nerve growth factor (NGF) in the sciatic nerves of diabetic rats (5). NGF,
which is essential for the development of
collateral reinnervation from cutaneous
C-fibers (6), depletes keratinocytes in the
skin of diabetic patients (7) and may be
reversed by ARI. Unlike dermal innervation, epidermal innervation was not
improved with ARI. This finding may
suggest that regenerating or sprouting
nerves of the dermis cannot easily enter
the epidermis in a diabetic state, rather
than that epidermal nerves cannot regenerate or sprout, since epidermal innervation was very poor in most patients. Glycated basement membrane of the epidermis may prevent reinnervation of dermal
nerve fibers into the epidermis.
HITOSHI YASUDA, MD, PHD
AKINORI HIRAI, MD, PHD
MARI JOKO, MD, PHD
MASAHIKO TERADA, MD, PHD
TORU KAWABATA, MD, PHD
KENGO MAEDA, MD, PHD
MASAKAZU HANEDA, MD, PHD
ATSUNORI KASHIWAGI, MD, PHD
TOSHIHIRO MAEDA, MD, PHD
RYUICHI KIKKAWA, MD, PHD

From the Third Department of Medicine (H.Y.,
A.H., J.M., M.T., T.K., K.M., M.H., A.K., R.K.) and
the Department of Anatomy (T.M.), Shiga University of Medical Science, Otsu, Shiga, Japan.
Address correspondence to Hitoshi Yasuda, MD,
PhD, Third Department of Medicine, Shiga University of Medical Science, Otsu, Shiga 520-2192,
Japan. E-mail: hyasuda@belle.shiga-med.ac.jp.

References
1. McCarthy BG, Hsieth ST, Stocks A, Hauer
P, Macko C, Cornblath DR, Griffin JW,
McArthur: Cutaneus innervation in sensory neuropathies: evaluation by skin
biopsy. Neurology 45:1848–1855, 1995
2. Hirai A, Yasuda H, Joko M, Maeda T,
Kikkawa R: Evaluation of diabetic neuropathy through the quantitation of cutaneous nerves. J Neurol Sci 172:55–62, 2000
3. Sima AA, Bril V, Nathaniel V, McEwen TA,
Brown MB, Lattimer SA, Greene DA: Regeneration and repair of myelinated fibers in
sural nerve biopsy specimens from patients
with diabetic neuropathy treated with
sorbinil. N Engl J Med 319:548–555, 1988
4. Terada M, Yasuda H, Kikkawa R, Shigeta Y:
Tolrestat improves nerve regeneration after
crush injury in streptozocin-induced diabetic rats. Metabolism 45:1189–1195, 1996
5. Ohi T, Saita K, Furukawa S, Ohta M,
Hayashi K, Matsukura S: Therapeutic
effects of aldose reductase inhibitor on
experimental diabetic neuropathy through
synthesis/secretion of nerve growth factor.
Exp Neurol 151:215–220, 1998
6. Doubleday B, Robinson PP: The role of
nerve growth factor in collateral reinnervation by cutaneous C-fibers in the rat. Brain
Res 593:179–184, 1992
7. Anand P, Terenghi G, Warner G, Kopelman P, Williams-Chestnut RE, Sinicropi
DV: The role of endogenous nerve growth
factor in human diabetic neuropathy. Nat
Med 2:703–707, 1996

Prevalence of
Diabetes in Adult
Patients With
Down’s Syndrome
Living in a
Residential Home
revious studies reported an increased
prevalence of diabetes in patients
with Down’s syndrome (1–3). These
studies, however, were limited to young
people with Down’s syndrome. Recently,
mortality from Down’s syndrome has
declined, and life expectancy in Down’s
syndrome patients has improved (4,5). It is

P

705


===== PDF PAGE 8 of 17 (pdftotext -layout) =====
Letters


important to examine the prevalence of dia-                      TSUYOSHI UCHIYAMA, MD                HbA1c concentrations in insulin-requir-
betes in adult patients with Down’s syn-                            TAKUJI HANAOKA, MD                ing patients (1,2), it is obvious that
drome to prevent diabetic complications                             SHOICHI TOMONO, MD                SMBG is not being used effectively. Barri-
and cardiovascular disease.                                    MASAHIKO KURABAYASHI, MD               ers to its effective use rest with both
     In this study, we examined the preva-                                                            patients (inconvenience, pain, and cost)
                                                From the Second Department of Internal Medicine
lence of diabetes in adult patients with                                                              and physicians (lack of time for analysis
                                                (Y.O., T.Ut., T.Uc., M.K.), the Health Science
Down’s syndrome living in a residential         Gunma University School of Medicine (S.T.),           and communication with the patients
home for adults with mental and physical        Gunma; and the Association for the Welfare of the     and, in some cases, lack of expertise for
handicaps. Data were collected for 40 adult     Mentally and Physically Handicapped (T.H.),           analysis). A major problem for some
patients identified as having Down’s syn-       Gunma, Japan.                                         patients is also a lack of time for appro-
                                                   Address correspondence to Yoshio Ohyama,
drome by chromosome analysis (26                MD, the Second Department of Internal Medicine,       priate communication with the physician
patients with regular trisomy 21, 13            Gunma University School of Medicine, 3-39-22,         or the health care provider responsible
patients with mosaic trisomy 21, and 1          Showa, Maebashi, Gunma, 371-8511, Japan. E-mail:      for insulin dose adjustments. We studied
patient with trisomy 21 by translocation).      ohyamay@news.sb.gunma-u.ac.jp.                        the effect of removing the impediments of
Of the 40 subjects, 27 were men and 13                                                                lack of time and expertise in analysis of
were women. The mean ages of the men            References                                            HbA1c concentrations in insulin-requir-
and women were 47.7 ± 5.8 years (range           1. Farquhar JW: Diabetic children in Scot-           ing patients.
37–62) and 48.8 ± 6.6 years (38–62),                land and the need for care. Scot Med J 7:              We recruited 29 patients taking
respectively. The BMIs of the men and               119–123, 1962                                     insulin for the study (12 men, 17
women were 22.0 ± 2.7 and 21.8 ± 2.1             2. Milunsky A, Neurath PW: Diabetes melli-           women; 10 with type 1 diabetes, 19 with
kg/m2, respectively. The mean fasting               tus in Down’s syndrome. Arch Environ              type 2 diabetes). Of the 29 patients, 15
plasma glucose (FPG) levels for the men             Health 17:372–376, 1968                           were on a mixed/split regimen, 4 on a
                                                 3. Jeremiah DE, Leyshon GE, Rose T, Francis
and women were 5.1 ± 0.4 mmol/l (92.1 ±             HWS, Elliott RW: Down’s syndrome and
                                                                                                      preprandial regular or lispro plus bed-
7.6 mg/dl) and 5.1 ± 0.5 mmol/l (92.3 ±             diabetes. Psychol Med 3:455–457, 1973             time NPH regimen, and 10 on a bedtime
8.3 mg/dl), respectively. The FPG for the        4. Declining mortality from Down syndrome:           NPH, daytime sulfonylurea agent regi-
patients was no more than 6.0 mmol/l                no cause for complacency (Editorial).             men. Although 23 of them were per-
(108 mg/dl). According to the new Ameri-            Lancet 335:888–889, 1990                          forming SMBG at the beginning of the
can Diabetes Association criteria for dia-       5. Baird PA, Sadovnick AD: Life expectancy           study, most could communicate only
betes using FPG (6), none of the patients           in Down syndrome. J Pediatr 110:849–              sporadically with the educator (who
were classified as having diabetes or               854, 1987                                         adjusted insulin doses in my practice)
impaired fasting glucose (IFG). The              6. Expert Committee on the Diagnosis and             because of conflicts in both of their busy
DECODE Study Group showed that 3,119                Classification of Diabetes Mellitus: Report       schedules.
                                                    of the Expert Committee on the Diagnosis
subjects (10.7%) had IFG and 1,143 sub-             and Classification of Diabetes Mellitus.
                                                                                                           All of the patients were given a One-
jects (3.9%) had diabetic FPG among the             Diabetes Care 20:1183–1197, 1997                  Touch Profile meter (LifeScan, Milpitas,
29,108 people (mean age 53.3 years, mean         7. The DECODE Study Group on behalf of               CA) at the onset of the study (pretest),
BMI 26.1 kg/m2) without previously diag-            the European Diabetes Epidemiology                and communication with the educator for
nosed diabetes, according to the new fast-          Group: Is fasting glucose sufficient to           the following 4 weeks was stressed. At
ing category (7). Another study reported that       define diabetes? Epidemiological data             that point (baseline), patients were
70.6% of men and 95.8% of women with                from 20 European studies. Diabetologia 42:        instructed in the use of a reporter (a
Down’s syndrome living in the community             647–654, 1999                                     device that connected the meter to their
were categorized as overweight (BMI              8. Bell AJ, Bhate MS: Prevalence of over-            phone), which transferred the data via a
25.1 kg/m2) (8). In our study, 3 of the            weight and obesity in Down’s syndrome             modem to a central server. The data were
                                                    and other mentally handicapped adults
men (11.1%) and none of the women were              living in the community. J Intellect Disabil
                                                                                                      analyzed by an algorithm developed by
categorized as overweight. It seems that the        Res 36:359–364, 1992                              one of the authors (M.B.D.). The results
very low prevalence of diabetes in our                                                                were faxed to the educator and mailed to
study results from the good control of body                                                           the patient.
weight, which may be related to a stable                                                                   HbA1c concentrations were measured
lifestyle. This includes a proper diet (2,000   Effect of Data                                        at pretest (in most patients), baseline, and
kcal/day) and appropriate exercise (an                                                                10 and 20 weeks later. The mean value for
hour of walking each day) for the patients
                                                Management on a                                       the pretest and baseline measurements
living in their residential home. Greater       Central Server on                                     was 8.4%, falling to 7.9% at 10 weeks and
emphasis should be given to the preven-         HbA1c Levels in                                       7.7% at 20 weeks. Sixteen of the patients
tion of excessive weight gain through                                                                 had mean initial values 8.0% and were
proper diet and appropriate exercise to         Insulin-Requiring                                     analyzed separately, because the American
reduce the prevalence of diabetes in the        Patients                                              Diabetes Association’s guidelines require
general population as well as in patients                                                             action at this point. In these patients at
with Down’s syndrome.                               elf-monitoring of blood glucose                   high risk for the microvascular complica-

                     YOSHIO OHYAMA, MD
                   TOSHIHIRO UTSUGI, MD
                                                S   (SMBG) is critically important to
                                                    adjust insulin doses appropriately.
                                                Given the general level of poor control of
                                                                                                      tions of diabetes, the mean value for the
                                                                                                      pretest and baseline measurements was
                                                                                                      9.1%, falling to 8.5% at 10 weeks and


706                                                                                                 DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000

===== PDF PAGE 8 of 17 (reading order, same page) =====
Letters

important to examine the prevalence of diabetes in adult patients with Down’s syndrome to prevent diabetic complications
and cardiovascular disease.
In this study, we examined the prevalence of diabetes in adult patients with
Down’s syndrome living in a residential
home for adults with mental and physical
handicaps. Data were collected for 40 adult
patients identified as having Down’s syndrome by chromosome analysis (26
patients with regular trisomy 21, 13
patients with mosaic trisomy 21, and 1
patient with trisomy 21 by translocation).
Of the 40 subjects, 27 were men and 13
were women. The mean ages of the men
and women were 47.7 ± 5.8 years (range
37–62) and 48.8 ± 6.6 years (38–62),
respectively. The BMIs of the men and
women were 22.0 ± 2.7 and 21.8 ± 2.1
kg/m2, respectively. The mean fasting
plasma glucose (FPG) levels for the men
and women were 5.1 ± 0.4 mmol/l (92.1 ±
7.6 mg/dl) and 5.1 ± 0.5 mmol/l (92.3 ±
8.3 mg/dl), respectively. The FPG for the
patients was no more than 6.0 mmol/l
(108 mg/dl). According to the new American Diabetes Association criteria for diabetes using FPG (6), none of the patients
were classified as having diabetes or
impaired fasting glucose (IFG). The
DECODE Study Group showed that 3,119
subjects (10.7%) had IFG and 1,143 subjects (3.9%) had diabetic FPG among the
29,108 people (mean age 53.3 years, mean
BMI 26.1 kg/m2) without previously diagnosed diabetes, according to the new fasting category (7). Another study reported that
70.6% of men and 95.8% of women with
Down’s syndrome living in the community
were categorized as overweight (BMI
25.1 kg/m2) (8). In our study, 3 of the
men (11.1%) and none of the women were
categorized as overweight. It seems that the
very low prevalence of diabetes in our
study results from the good control of body
weight, which may be related to a stable
lifestyle. This includes a proper diet (2,000
kcal/day) and appropriate exercise (an
hour of walking each day) for the patients
living in their residential home. Greater
emphasis should be given to the prevention of excessive weight gain through
proper diet and appropriate exercise to
reduce the prevalence of diabetes in the
general population as well as in patients
with Down’s syndrome.
YOSHIO OHYAMA, MD
TOSHIHIRO UTSUGI, MD
706

TSUYOSHI UCHIYAMA, MD
TAKUJI HANAOKA, MD
SHOICHI TOMONO, MD
MASAHIKO KURABAYASHI, MD
From the Second Department of Internal Medicine
(Y.O., T.Ut., T.Uc., M.K.), the Health Science
Gunma University School of Medicine (S.T.),
Gunma; and the Association for the Welfare of the
Mentally and Physically Handicapped (T.H.),
Gunma, Japan.
Address correspondence to Yoshio Ohyama,
MD, the Second Department of Internal Medicine,
Gunma University School of Medicine, 3-39-22,
Showa, Maebashi, Gunma, 371-8511, Japan. E-mail:
ohyamay@news.sb.gunma-u.ac.jp.

References
1. Farquhar JW: Diabetic children in Scotland and the need for care. Scot Med J 7:
119–123, 1962
2. Milunsky A, Neurath PW: Diabetes mellitus in Down’s syndrome. Arch Environ
Health 17:372–376, 1968
3. Jeremiah DE, Leyshon GE, Rose T, Francis
HWS, Elliott RW: Down’s syndrome and
diabetes. Psychol Med 3:455–457, 1973
4. Declining mortality from Down syndrome:
no cause for complacency (Editorial).
Lancet 335:888–889, 1990
5. Baird PA, Sadovnick AD: Life expectancy
in Down syndrome. J Pediatr 110:849–
854, 1987
6. Expert Committee on the Diagnosis and
Classification of Diabetes Mellitus: Report
of the Expert Committee on the Diagnosis
and Classification of Diabetes Mellitus.
Diabetes Care 20:1183–1197, 1997
7. The DECODE Study Group on behalf of
the European Diabetes Epidemiology
Group: Is fasting glucose sufficient to
define diabetes? Epidemiological data
from 20 European studies. Diabetologia 42:
647–654, 1999
8. Bell AJ, Bhate MS: Prevalence of overweight and obesity in Down’s syndrome
and other mentally handicapped adults
living in the community. J Intellect Disabil
Res 36:359–364, 1992

Effect of Data
Management on a
Central Server on
HbA1c Levels in
Insulin-Requiring
Patients
elf-monitoring of blood glucose
(SMBG) is critically important to
adjust insulin doses appropriately.
Given the general level of poor control of

S

HbA1c concentrations in insulin-requiring patients (1,2), it is obvious that
SMBG is not being used effectively. Barriers to its effective use rest with both
patients (inconvenience, pain, and cost)
and physicians (lack of time for analysis
and communication with the patients
and, in some cases, lack of expertise for
analysis). A major problem for some
patients is also a lack of time for appropriate communication with the physician
or the health care provider responsible
for insulin dose adjustments. We studied
the effect of removing the impediments of
lack of time and expertise in analysis of
HbA1c concentrations in insulin-requiring patients.
We recruited 29 patients taking
insulin for the study (12 men, 17
women; 10 with type 1 diabetes, 19 with
type 2 diabetes). Of the 29 patients, 15
were on a mixed/split regimen, 4 on a
preprandial regular or lispro plus bedtime NPH regimen, and 10 on a bedtime
NPH, daytime sulfonylurea agent regimen. Although 23 of them were performing SMBG at the beginning of the
study, most could communicate only
sporadically with the educator (who
adjusted insulin doses in my practice)
because of conflicts in both of their busy
schedules.
All of the patients were given a OneTouch Profile meter (LifeScan, Milpitas,
CA) at the onset of the study (pretest),
and communication with the educator for
the following 4 weeks was stressed. At
that point (baseline), patients were
instructed in the use of a reporter (a
device that connected the meter to their
phone), which transferred the data via a
modem to a central server. The data were
analyzed by an algorithm developed by
one of the authors (M.B.D.). The results
were faxed to the educator and mailed to
the patient.
HbA1c concentrations were measured
at pretest (in most patients), baseline, and
10 and 20 weeks later. The mean value for
the pretest and baseline measurements
was 8.4%, falling to 7.9% at 10 weeks and
7.7% at 20 weeks. Sixteen of the patients
had mean initial values 8.0% and were
analyzed separately, because the American
Diabetes Association’s guidelines require
action at this point. In these patients at
high risk for the microvascular complications of diabetes, the mean value for the
pretest and baseline measurements was
9.1%, falling to 8.5% at 10 weeks and
DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000


===== PDF PAGE 9 of 17 (pdftotext -layout) =====
                                                                                                                                                 Letters


8.3% at 20 weeks. Data management by                  Prevalence of                                      Chongup area of Korea were subjected to a
the central server significantly lowered                                                                 2-h oral glucose tolerance test. The preva-
the 10- and 20-week HbA1c concentra-
                                                      Diabetes, Impaired                                 lence of glucose tolerance categories was
tions in both groups (P  0.001 by analy-             Glucose Tolerance,                                 obtained using the WHO criteria and the
sis of variance).                                     and Impaired                                       ADA fasting plasma glucose criteria.
     The (nonsignificant) difference                                                                     Anthropometric and metabolic characteris-
between the baseline and pretest HbA1c                Fasting Glucose in a                               tics of the subjects with different categories
concentrations in the whole cohort was                Rural Population of                                were compared.
0.4%, and in the high-risk patients,                  Korea, According to                                     The prevalence of known diabetes in
0.3%. Since 50% of the changes in HbA1c                                                                  this population was 3.4%. The preva-
concentrations occur in the first month               1997 American                                      lence of unknown diabetes by WHO cri-
(3,4), the similarity of the pretest and              Diabetes Association                               teria and ADA criteria was 4.7% (95% CI
baseline values shows the absence of the              and 1985 World                                     3.5–5.9%) and 4.5% (3.3–5.7%), respec-
Hawthorne effect.                                                                                        tively. When the data were adjusted to
     Convenience and efficient use of time            Health Organization                                the standard world population of Segi
for both the patient and educator (it took            Criteria                                           (5), the prevalence of diabetes was 7.1%
1 min for the educator to decide on                                                                     by WHO criteria and 7.7% by ADA crite-
insulin dose adjustments after reviewing                                                                 ria. Among elderly subjects aged 65,
the information provided by the central                  n 1997, the American Diabetes Associa-          the prevalence of unknown diabetes by
server) were important factors in the suc-
cess of central data management of SMBG
values in this small study. Wider applica-
tion of this technology should improve
                                                      I  tion (ADA) proposed new criteria for
                                                         defining diabetes based on fasting
                                                      plasma glucose (FPG) (1). A new diagnos-
                                                      tic entity, impaired fasting glucose (IFG),
                                                                                                         ADA criteria was slightly, but not signifi-
                                                                                                         cantly, less (3.3%; 95% CI 1.5–5.1%)
                                                                                                         than the prevalence by WHO criteria
                                                                                                         (4.5%; 2.5–6.5%).
diabetes control in populations of insulin-           was also introduced. However, conse-                    On the other hand, the prevalence of
requiring patients.                                   quent studies have pointed out several             IGT by WHO criteria (12.4%; 95% CI
                                                      limitations of the new ADA criteria, such          10.5–14.3%) was significantly higher
                    MAYER B. DAVIDSON, MD             as a significant difference in the preva-          than that of IFG by ADA criteria (6.3%;
                    GWYNETH LEWIS, MAOM               lence of diabetes according to the World           4.9–7.7, P  0.01). Of the 137 subjects
                                                      Health Organization (WHO) criteria and             with IGT by WHO criteria, 104 (75.9%)
From the Clinical Trials Unit (M.B.D.), Charles R.    ADA criteria (2). There is also consider-          were classified as normoglycemic by
Drew University, Los Angeles; and City of Hope
National Medical Center (G.L.), Duarte, California.   able discordance between IFG and                   ADA criteria. The level of agreement
   Address correspondence to Mayer B. Davidson,       impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) and a             between the 2 criteria was low ( = 0.42,
MD, Clinical Trials Unit (MP 30), Charles R. Drew     lower sensitivity of IFG for predicting the        P  0.001).
University, 1731 E. 120th St., Los Angeles, CA.       progression to diabetes (3) or develop-                 To compare clinical characteristics of
E-mail: madavids@cdrewu.edu.
                                                      ment of cardiovascular disease (4).                the subjects with IGT and IFG according
                                                           To examine the prevalence of different        to WHO and ADA diagnostic criteria, we
Acknowledgments — Dr. Davidson is sup-
ported by National Institutes of Health Grant         categories of glucose tolerance in a rural         classified nondiabetic subjects by both
#5U01-DKS54047.                                       population of Korea using the 1997 ADA             criteria into 4 categories (Table 1). The
   We thank Mary Pearce and Barbara Wise-             and the 1985 WHO criteria, 1,108 sub-              concordant IGT/IFG group showed
hart, who also helped manage some of these            jects (aged 40–99 years) living in the             higher BMI and waist-to-hip ratio, systolic
patients.


References                                            Table 1—Comparison of clinical and metabolic characteristics of patients in the various cate-
 1. Davidson MB: Diabetes care in health              gories of glucose tolerance by 1997 ADA and 1985 WHO classifications
    maintenance organisation and fee-for-ser-
    vice settings. Dis Manage Health Outcomes
    2:189–197, 1997                                                                        NGT/NFG          IGT/NFG         NGT/IFG           IGT/IFG
 2. Hayward RA, Manning WG, Kaplan SH,
    Wagner EH, Greenfield S: Starting insulin         n                                       841             104           34           29
    therapy in patients with type 2 diabetes:         Age (years)                          60.3 ± 9.4      65.4 ± 10.4* 61.5 ± 10.8  64.2 ± 9.4*
    effectiveness, complications, and resource        BMI (kg/m2)                          23.6 ± 2.9      23.7 ± 3.5   24.1 ± 3.7   25.5 ± 2.8*
    utilization. JAMA 278:1663–1669, 1997             Waist-to-hip ratio                   0.88 ± 0.06     0.88 ± 0.06  0.90 ± 0.06  0.91 ± 0.06*
 3. Tahara Y, Shima K: The response of GHb            FPG (mmol/l)                          4.8 ± 0.6       5.2 ± 0.5*   6.4 ± 0.3*†  6.5 ± 0.3*†
    to stepwise plasma glucose change over            2-h Plasma glucose (mmol/l)           6.0 ± 0.8       8.8 ± 0.8*‡  6.7 ± 0.8 *  9.0 ± 0.9*‡
    time in diabetic patients. Diabetes Care 16:      Systolic blood pressure (mmHg)      131.5 ± 22.6    134.8 ± 23.2 136.2 ± 23.6 151.1 ± 25.6*
    1313–1314, 1993                                   Diastolic blood pressure (mmHg)      85.2 ± 11.8     85.4 ± 12.4  86.5 ± 14.4  90.6 ± 12.1
 4. Tahara Y, Shima K: Kinetics of HbA1c, gly-
                                                      Total cholesterol (mmol/l)            5.2 ± 0.9       5.4 ± 0.9    5.5 ± 0.9    5.2 ± 0.9
    cated albumin, and fructosamine and
    analysis of their weight functions against        Triglyceride (mmol/l)                 1.8 ± 1.1       2.3 ± 1.5*   1.9 ± 0.7    2.6 ± 1.7*
    preceding plasma glucose level. Diabetes          HDL cholesterol (mmol/l)              1.2 ± 0.3       1.2 ± 0.3    1.2 ± 0.3    1.1 ± 0.3
    Care 18:440–447, 1995                             Data are n or means ± SD. *P  0.05 vs. NGT/NFG; †P  0.05 vs. IGT/NFG; ‡P  0.05 vs. NGT/IFG.


DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000                                                                                                           707

===== PDF PAGE 9 of 17 (reading order, same page) =====
Letters

8.3% at 20 weeks. Data management by
the central server significantly lowered
the 10- and 20-week HbA1c concentrations in both groups (P  0.001 by analysis of variance).
The (nonsignificant) difference
between the baseline and pretest HbA1c
concentrations in the whole cohort was
0.4%, and in the high-risk patients,
0.3%. Since 50% of the changes in HbA1c
concentrations occur in the first month
(3,4), the similarity of the pretest and
baseline values shows the absence of the
Hawthorne effect.
Convenience and efficient use of time
for both the patient and educator (it took
1 min for the educator to decide on
insulin dose adjustments after reviewing
the information provided by the central
server) were important factors in the success of central data management of SMBG
values in this small study. Wider application of this technology should improve
diabetes control in populations of insulinrequiring patients.

Prevalence of
Diabetes, Impaired
Glucose Tolerance,
and Impaired
Fasting Glucose in a
Rural Population of
Korea, According to
1997 American
Diabetes Association
and 1985 World
Health Organization
Criteria
n 1997, the American Diabetes Association (ADA) proposed new criteria for
defining diabetes based on fasting
plasma glucose (FPG) (1). A new diagnostic entity, impaired fasting glucose (IFG),
was also introduced. However, consequent studies have pointed out several
limitations of the new ADA criteria, such
as a significant difference in the prevalence of diabetes according to the World
Health Organization (WHO) criteria and
ADA criteria (2). There is also considerable discordance between IFG and
impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) and a
lower sensitivity of IFG for predicting the
progression to diabetes (3) or development of cardiovascular disease (4).
To examine the prevalence of different
categories of glucose tolerance in a rural
population of Korea using the 1997 ADA
and the 1985 WHO criteria, 1,108 subjects (aged 40–99 years) living in the

I

MAYER B. DAVIDSON, MD
GWYNETH LEWIS, MAOM
From the Clinical Trials Unit (M.B.D.), Charles R.
Drew University, Los Angeles; and City of Hope
National Medical Center (G.L.), Duarte, California.
Address correspondence to Mayer B. Davidson,
MD, Clinical Trials Unit (MP 30), Charles R. Drew
University, 1731 E. 120th St., Los Angeles, CA.
E-mail: madavids@cdrewu.edu.

Acknowledgments — Dr. Davidson is supported by National Institutes of Health Grant
#5U01-DKS54047.
We thank Mary Pearce and Barbara Wisehart, who also helped manage some of these
patients.
References
1. Davidson MB: Diabetes care in health
maintenance organisation and fee-for-service settings. Dis Manage Health Outcomes
2:189–197, 1997
2. Hayward RA, Manning WG, Kaplan SH,
Wagner EH, Greenfield S: Starting insulin
therapy in patients with type 2 diabetes:
effectiveness, complications, and resource
utilization. JAMA 278:1663–1669, 1997
3. Tahara Y, Shima K: The response of GHb
to stepwise plasma glucose change over
time in diabetic patients. Diabetes Care 16:
1313–1314, 1993
4. Tahara Y, Shima K: Kinetics of HbA1c, glycated albumin, and fructosamine and
analysis of their weight functions against
preceding plasma glucose level. Diabetes
Care 18:440–447, 1995
DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000

Chongup area of Korea were subjected to a
2-h oral glucose tolerance test. The prevalence of glucose tolerance categories was
obtained using the WHO criteria and the
ADA fasting plasma glucose criteria.
Anthropometric and metabolic characteristics of the subjects with different categories
were compared.
The prevalence of known diabetes in
this population was 3.4%. The prevalence of unknown diabetes by WHO criteria and ADA criteria was 4.7% (95% CI
3.5–5.9%) and 4.5% (3.3–5.7%), respectively. When the data were adjusted to
the standard world population of Segi
(5), the prevalence of diabetes was 7.1%
by WHO criteria and 7.7% by ADA criteria. Among elderly subjects aged 65,
the prevalence of unknown diabetes by
ADA criteria was slightly, but not significantly, less (3.3%; 95% CI 1.5–5.1%)
than the prevalence by WHO criteria
(4.5%; 2.5–6.5%).
On the other hand, the prevalence of
IGT by WHO criteria (12.4%; 95% CI
10.5–14.3%) was significantly higher
than that of IFG by ADA criteria (6.3%;
4.9–7.7, P  0.01). Of the 137 subjects
with IGT by WHO criteria, 104 (75.9%)
were classified as normoglycemic by
ADA criteria. The level of agreement
between the 2 criteria was low ( = 0.42,
P  0.001).
To compare clinical characteristics of
the subjects with IGT and IFG according
to WHO and ADA diagnostic criteria, we
classified nondiabetic subjects by both
criteria into 4 categories (Table 1). The
concordant IGT/IFG group showed
higher BMI and waist-to-hip ratio, systolic

Table 1—Comparison of clinical and metabolic characteristics of patients in the various categories of glucose tolerance by 1997 ADA and 1985 WHO classifications
NGT/NFG
n
Age (years)
BMI (kg/m2)
Waist-to-hip ratio
FPG (mmol/l)
2-h Plasma glucose (mmol/l)
Systolic blood pressure (mmHg)
Diastolic blood pressure (mmHg)
Total cholesterol (mmol/l)
Triglyceride (mmol/l)
HDL cholesterol (mmol/l)

841
60.3 ± 9.4
23.6 ± 2.9
0.88 ± 0.06
4.8 ± 0.6
6.0 ± 0.8
131.5 ± 22.6
85.2 ± 11.8
5.2 ± 0.9
1.8 ± 1.1
1.2 ± 0.3

IGT/NFG

NGT/IFG

IGT/IFG

104
34
29
65.4 ± 10.4* 61.5 ± 10.8
64.2 ± 9.4*
23.7 ± 3.5
24.1 ± 3.7
25.5 ± 2.8*
0.88 ± 0.06
0.90 ± 0.06
0.91 ± 0.06*
5.2 ± 0.5*
6.4 ± 0.3*†
6.5 ± 0.3*†
8.8 ± 0.8*‡
6.7 ± 0.8 *
9.0 ± 0.9*‡
134.8 ± 23.2 136.2 ± 23.6 151.1 ± 25.6*
85.4 ± 12.4
86.5 ± 14.4
90.6 ± 12.1
5.4 ± 0.9
5.5 ± 0.9
5.2 ± 0.9
2.3 ± 1.5*
1.9 ± 0.7
2.6 ± 1.7*
1.2 ± 0.3
1.2 ± 0.3
1.1 ± 0.3

Data are n or means ± SD. *P  0.05 vs. NGT/NFG; †P  0.05 vs. IGT/NFG; ‡P  0.05 vs. NGT/IFG.

707


===== PDF PAGE 10 of 17 (pdftotext -layout) =====
Letters


blood pressure, FPG and 2-h plasma glu-                                   MOO-SONG LEE, MD               Rapid Remission of
cose (PP2), and plasma triglyceride levels                                  SANG I. LEE, MD
than concordant normal subjects. Both                                     SUNG K. HONG, MD
                                                                                                         Nephrotic-Range
normal glucose tolerance (NGT)/IFG and                                        KI-UP LEE, MD              Proteinuria in a
IGT/NFG groups had higher FPG and                                                                        Case of
PP2 than concordant normal subjects.            From the Departments of Internal Medicine ( J.-Y.P.,
The IGT/NFG group also showed higher            Y.I.K., C.S.C, Y.E.C., S.-W.K., S.K.H., K.-U.L.) and     Histologically
ages and plasma triglyceride levels than        Preventive Medicine (M.-S.L., S.I.L.), University of     Proven Diabetic
                                                Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
the concordant normal group. As
                                                    Address correspondence to Ki-Up Lee, MD, the         Nephropathy
expected, the NGT/IFG group exhibited
significantly higher FPG and lower PP2
                                                Department of Internal Medicine, University of           Treated With an
                                                Ulsan College of Medicine, 388-1 Poong-Nap
values than the IGT/NFG group. How-             Dong, Song-Pa Ku, Seoul 138-736, Korea. E-mail:          ACE Inhibitor
ever, there was no significant difference in    kulee@www.amc.seoul.kr.
all other variables between the 2 groups.
     The present study found that the                                                                       n the past, a relentless decline in renal
prevalence of diabetes among Koreans in
the rural area by ADA and WHO criteria
was similar: 8.1% by WHO criteria and
7.9% by ADA criteria. However, the preva-
                                                References
                                                 1. The Expert Committee on the Diagnosis
                                                    and Classification of Diabetes Mellitus:
                                                                                                         I  function was considered inevitable in
                                                                                                            diabetic nephropathy with nephrotic-
                                                                                                         range proteinuria (1). Some recent studies,
                                                                                                         however, have demonstrated that the use
                                                    Report of the Expert Committee on the
lence of diabetes by ADA criteria was,              Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes             of ACE inhibitors can maintain stable
although statistically not significant, 1.2%        Mellitus. Diabetes Care 20:1183–1197,                renal function and reduce proteinuria in
lower than that by WHO criteria in the              1997                                                 relatively young type 1 diabetic patients
elderly subjects age 65. In addition,           2. Wahl PW, Savage PJ, Psaty BM, Orchard                with nephrotic-range proteinuria (2–4). In
although FPG was not related to age, 2-h            TJ, Robbins JA, Tracy RP: Diabetes in older          these studies, nephrotic-range proteinuria
                                                    adults: comparison of 1997 American Dia-
glucose levels were significantly correlated                                                             remitted within a few years after com-
                                                    betes Association classification of diabetes
with age (r = 0.27, P  0.05). These obser-         mellitus with 1985 WHO classification.               mencing treatment with an ACE inhibitor.
vations suggest that ADA criteria may               Lancet 352:1012–1015, 1998                           We discuss here an elderly type 2 diabetic
underestimate the prevalence of diabetes,        3. Shaw JE, Zimmet PZ, de Courten M,                    woman who presented with nephrotic
especially in the elderly subjects, because         Dowse GK, Chitson P, Gareeboo H, Hem-                syndrome due to biopsy-proven diabetic
of the increased sensitivity of the 2-h glu-        raj F, Fareed D, Tuomilehto J, Alberti KG:           nephropathy. Treatment with an ACE
cose values to aging.                               Impaired fasting glucose or impaired glu-            inhibitor, temocapril, resulted in an
     In agreement with most previous                cose tolerance: what best predicts future            extremely rapid decrease of proteinuria on
studies (2,6), the prevalence of IGT by             diabetes in Mauritius? Diabetes Care 22:             2 separate occasions.
WHO criteria was almost 2-fold higher               399–402, 1999                                             A 69-year-old Japanese woman was
                                                 4. Tominaga M, Eguchi H, Manaka H,
than that of IFG by ADA criteria. In addi-                                                               admitted to our hospital in March 1998
                                                    Igarashi K, Kato T, Sekikawa A: Impaired
tion, the concordance between subjects              glucose tolerance is a risk factor for cardio-       with abdominal pain and constipation. Her
with IFG and IGT was not high. Thus, the            vascular disease, but not impaired fasting           medical and family histories were unre-
2 tests appear to diagnose 2 different pop-         glucose: the Funagata Diabetes Study. Dia-           markable and the patient had not under-
ulations of subjects with disturbed glu-            betes Care 22:920–924, 1999                          gone a health check-up in the past. She
cose metabolism. Accordingly, Gimeno et          5. King H, Rewers M: Global estimates for               was 150 cm tall and weighed 46 kg. Her
al. (6) reported that the subjects with IGT         prevalence of diabetes mellitus and                  blood pressure was 153/80 mmHg and no
had higher blood pressure and triglyceride          impaired glucose tolerance in adults.                pretibial edema was present. Laboratory
levels and lower HDL cholesterol levels             WHO Ad Hoc Diabetes Reporting Group.                 studies revealed a fasting plasma glucose
than the subjects with IFG. On the other            Diabetes Care 16:157–177, 1993                       (FPG) level of 14.2 µmol/l, an HbA1c con-
                                                 6. Gimeno SGA, Ferreira SRG, Franco LJ,
hand, the present study and the study by                                                                 centration of 8.8% (normal range
                                                    Iunes M, the Japanese-Brazilian Diabetes
Larsson et al. (7) showed that the subjects         Study Group: Comparison of glucose tol-              4.2–5.5%), a serum creatinine level of 44.2
with IGT and the subjects with IFG are              erance categories according to World                 µmol/l, a serum albumin level of 26 g/l,
comparable in terms of BMI, blood pres-             Health Organization and American Dia-                and a serum cholesterol level of 5.35
sure, and plasma lipids. However, consider-         betes Association diagnostic criteria in a           µmol/l. Urinalysis showed 3 proteinuria
ing higher cardiovascular events in the sub-        population-based study in Brazil. Diabetes           with normal sediment. The 24-h urinary
jects with IGT (4), it is quite possible that       Care 21:1889–1892, 1998                              protein excretion was 7.2 g and creatinine
factors other than ordinary coronary risk        7. Larsson H, Berglund G, Lindgarde F,                  clearance was 1.59 ml/s. She was treated
factors (8) may be different in the 2 diag-         Ahren B: Comparison of ADA and WHO                   conservatively, under the diagnosis of
nostic groups.                                      criteria for diagnosis of diabetes and glu-          intestinal pseudo-obstruction, and her
                                                    cose intolerance. Diabetologia 41:1124–
                                                                                                         abdominal symptoms improved rapidly. In
                                                    1125, 1998
                    JOONG-YEOL PARK, MD          8. Harjai KJ: Potential new cardiovascular              addition to protein and salt restriction (30
                        YOUNG I. KIM, MD            risk factors: left ventricular hypertrophy,          g/day and 3 g/day, respectively), temocapril
                      CHEOL S. CHOI, MD             homocysteine, lipoprotein(a), triglyc-               (Acecol) (2 mg/day) together with gli-
                       YUN E. CHUNG, MD             erides, oxidative stress, and fibrinogen.            clazide (20 mg/day) and voglibose (0.6
                     SANG-WOOK KIM, MD              Ann Intern Med 131:376–386, 1999                     mg/day) were started in the hospital. The


708                                                                                                    DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000

===== PDF PAGE 10 of 17 (reading order, same page) =====
Letters

blood pressure, FPG and 2-h plasma glucose (PP2), and plasma triglyceride levels
than concordant normal subjects. Both
normal glucose tolerance (NGT)/IFG and
IGT/NFG groups had higher FPG and
PP2 than concordant normal subjects.
The IGT/NFG group also showed higher
ages and plasma triglyceride levels than
the concordant normal group. As
expected, the NGT/IFG group exhibited
significantly higher FPG and lower PP2
values than the IGT/NFG group. However, there was no significant difference in
all other variables between the 2 groups.
The present study found that the
prevalence of diabetes among Koreans in
the rural area by ADA and WHO criteria
was similar: 8.1% by WHO criteria and
7.9% by ADA criteria. However, the prevalence of diabetes by ADA criteria was,
although statistically not significant, 1.2%
lower than that by WHO criteria in the
elderly subjects age 65. In addition,
although FPG was not related to age, 2-h
glucose levels were significantly correlated
with age (r = 0.27, P  0.05). These observations suggest that ADA criteria may
underestimate the prevalence of diabetes,
especially in the elderly subjects, because
of the increased sensitivity of the 2-h glucose values to aging.
In agreement with most previous
studies (2,6), the prevalence of IGT by
WHO criteria was almost 2-fold higher
than that of IFG by ADA criteria. In addition, the concordance between subjects
with IFG and IGT was not high. Thus, the
2 tests appear to diagnose 2 different populations of subjects with disturbed glucose metabolism. Accordingly, Gimeno et
al. (6) reported that the subjects with IGT
had higher blood pressure and triglyceride
levels and lower HDL cholesterol levels
than the subjects with IFG. On the other
hand, the present study and the study by
Larsson et al. (7) showed that the subjects
with IGT and the subjects with IFG are
comparable in terms of BMI, blood pressure, and plasma lipids. However, considering higher cardiovascular events in the subjects with IGT (4), it is quite possible that
factors other than ordinary coronary risk
factors (8) may be different in the 2 diagnostic groups.
JOONG-YEOL PARK, MD
YOUNG I. KIM, MD
CHEOL S. CHOI, MD
YUN E. CHUNG, MD
SANG-WOOK KIM, MD
708

MOO-SONG LEE, MD
SANG I. LEE, MD
SUNG K. HONG, MD
KI-UP LEE, MD
From the Departments of Internal Medicine ( J.-Y.P.,
Y.I.K., C.S.C, Y.E.C., S.-W.K., S.K.H., K.-U.L.) and
Preventive Medicine (M.-S.L., S.I.L.), University of
Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
Address correspondence to Ki-Up Lee, MD, the
Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Ulsan College of Medicine, 388-1 Poong-Nap
Dong, Song-Pa Ku, Seoul 138-736, Korea. E-mail:
kulee@www.amc.seoul.kr.

References
1. The Expert Committee on the Diagnosis
and Classification of Diabetes Mellitus:
Report of the Expert Committee on the
Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes
Mellitus. Diabetes Care 20:1183–1197,
1997
2. Wahl PW, Savage PJ, Psaty BM, Orchard
TJ, Robbins JA, Tracy RP: Diabetes in older
adults: comparison of 1997 American Diabetes Association classification of diabetes
mellitus with 1985 WHO classification.
Lancet 352:1012–1015, 1998
3. Shaw JE, Zimmet PZ, de Courten M,
Dowse GK, Chitson P, Gareeboo H, Hemraj F, Fareed D, Tuomilehto J, Alberti KG:
Impaired fasting glucose or impaired glucose tolerance: what best predicts future
diabetes in Mauritius? Diabetes Care 22:
399–402, 1999
4. Tominaga M, Eguchi H, Manaka H,
Igarashi K, Kato T, Sekikawa A: Impaired
glucose tolerance is a risk factor for cardiovascular disease, but not impaired fasting
glucose: the Funagata Diabetes Study. Diabetes Care 22:920–924, 1999
5. King H, Rewers M: Global estimates for
prevalence of diabetes mellitus and
impaired glucose tolerance in adults.
WHO Ad Hoc Diabetes Reporting Group.
Diabetes Care 16:157–177, 1993
6. Gimeno SGA, Ferreira SRG, Franco LJ,
Iunes M, the Japanese-Brazilian Diabetes
Study Group: Comparison of glucose tolerance categories according to World
Health Organization and American Diabetes Association diagnostic criteria in a
population-based study in Brazil. Diabetes
Care 21:1889–1892, 1998
7. Larsson H, Berglund G, Lindgarde F,
Ahren B: Comparison of ADA and WHO
criteria for diagnosis of diabetes and glucose intolerance. Diabetologia 41:1124–
1125, 1998
8. Harjai KJ: Potential new cardiovascular
risk factors: left ventricular hypertrophy,
homocysteine, lipoprotein(a), triglycerides, oxidative stress, and fibrinogen.
Ann Intern Med 131:376–386, 1999

Rapid Remission of
Nephrotic-Range
Proteinuria in a
Case of
Histologically
Proven Diabetic
Nephropathy
Treated With an
ACE Inhibitor
n the past, a relentless decline in renal
function was considered inevitable in
diabetic nephropathy with nephroticrange proteinuria (1). Some recent studies,
however, have demonstrated that the use
of ACE inhibitors can maintain stable
renal function and reduce proteinuria in
relatively young type 1 diabetic patients
with nephrotic-range proteinuria (2–4). In
these studies, nephrotic-range proteinuria
remitted within a few years after commencing treatment with an ACE inhibitor.
We discuss here an elderly type 2 diabetic
woman who presented with nephrotic
syndrome due to biopsy-proven diabetic
nephropathy. Treatment with an ACE
inhibitor, temocapril, resulted in an
extremely rapid decrease of proteinuria on
2 separate occasions.
A 69-year-old Japanese woman was
admitted to our hospital in March 1998
with abdominal pain and constipation. Her
medical and family histories were unremarkable and the patient had not undergone a health check-up in the past. She
was 150 cm tall and weighed 46 kg. Her
blood pressure was 153/80 mmHg and no
pretibial edema was present. Laboratory
studies revealed a fasting plasma glucose
(FPG) level of 14.2 µmol/l, an HbA1c concentration of 8.8% (normal range
4.2–5.5%), a serum creatinine level of 44.2
µmol/l, a serum albumin level of 26 g/l,
and a serum cholesterol level of 5.35
µmol/l. Urinalysis showed 3 proteinuria
with normal sediment. The 24-h urinary
protein excretion was 7.2 g and creatinine
clearance was 1.59 ml/s. She was treated
conservatively, under the diagnosis of
intestinal pseudo-obstruction, and her
abdominal symptoms improved rapidly. In
addition to protein and salt restriction (30
g/day and 3 g/day, respectively), temocapril
(Acecol) (2 mg/day) together with gliclazide (20 mg/day) and voglibose (0.6
mg/day) were started in the hospital. The

I

DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000


===== PDF PAGE 11 of 17 (pdftotext -layout) =====
                                                                                                                                     Letters


                                                                                                dense deposits were absent. The histologi-
                                                                                                cal diagnosis based on these findings was
                                                                                                diffuse and nodular diabetic glomeruloscle-
                                                                                                rosis. Temocapril (2 mg/day) was re-started
                                                                                                and the dose of furosemide was increased
                                                                                                to 40 mg a day after renal biopsy. Efonidip-
                                                                                                ine (Landel), 40 mg/day was added a few
                                                                                                days later. Insulin therapy (4U with NPH
                                                                                                insulin at breakfast) was used to control
                                                                                                hyperglycemia for a week, and later
                                                                                                replaced with gliclazide (40 mg/day). The
                                                                                                24-h urinary protein excretion declined
                                                                                                again markedly to 1.6 g within a month
                                                                                                after starting temocapril (Fig. 1). Pleural
                                                                                                effusions and edema disappeared and her
                                                                                                body weight decreased to 41 kg. Blood
                                                                                                pressure and serum albumin levels also
                                                                                                improved to 120/70 mmHg and 28 g/l,
                                                                                                respectively. A month after admission, she
                                                                                                was asymptomatic and was discharged
                                                                                                from the hospital.
                                                                                                     It has long been thought that the
                                                                                                appearance of persistent proteinuria her-
                                                                                                alds a progressive decline of renal function
                                                                                                during the natural history of diabetic
                                                                                                nephropathy, and that nephrotic-range
                                                                                                proteinuria, in particular, points toward a
                                                                                                poor renal prognosis (1). Meanwhile,
Figure 1—Clinical course of the patient.                                                        many recent studies have demonstrated
                                                                                                that antihypertensive therapy can slow the
                                                                                                rate of decline of renal function in diabetic
patient’s 24-h urinary protein excretion       vibratory sensation and an orthostatic drop      nephropathy. Furthermore, it was sug-
declined markedly to 0.5 g within 2 weeks      of blood pressure. Laboratory studies            gested in more recent studies that ACE
(Fig. 1). Blood pressure and serum albu-       revealed a postprandial plasma glucose           inhibitors reduce proteinuria and protect
min levels also improved to 130/70 mmHg        level of 15.3 µmol/l, an HbA1c concentra-        renal function in patients with diabetic
and 37 g/l, respectively. The patient was      tion of 6.2%, a serum creatinine level of        nephropathy more effectively than other
followed at the outpatient clinic after dis-   44.2 µmol/l, a serum albumin level of 24         antihypertensive agents, and that this
charge from the hospital. However, in May      g/l, and a serum cholesterol level of 4.89       renoprotective effect of ACE inhibitors is
1998, she stopped coming to the clinic and     µmol/l. The 24-h urinary excretion was 6.2 g     independent of changes in blood pressure
discontinued all of her medications.           and creatinine clearance was 1.07 ml/s.          (5). Some studies have shown that type 1
     The patient, however, apparently          Chest X-rays showed moderate pleural             diabetic patients with nephrotic-range
remained well until December 1998 when         effusions. Renal biopsy was performed in         proteinuria can maintain stable renal func-
she developed leg edema in association         the hospital to clarify the etiology of          tion with a marked reduction of protein-
with an increase in body weight from 45 to     repeated nephrotic-range proteinuria, with       uria on ACE inhibitors (2–4). Herbert et
48 kg within a month. She was subse-           written informed consent from the patient.       al. (2) reported that 7 of 42 (16.7%) type 1
quently seen again at our hospital. Her        The specimen for light microscopy con-           diabetic patients with nephrotic-range
blood pressure was 171/89 mmHg and uri-        tained 9 glomeruli, of which 1 was globally      proteinuria treated with captopril achieved
nalysis revealed 3 proteinuria. Her chest     sclerotic and the rest showed diffuse inter-     remission of proteinuria and maintained
X-ray revealed mild pleural effusions. An      capillary glomerulosclerosis without cellu-      stable renal function over a mean follow-
attempt to control her edema with a            lar proliferation. More than half of the         up period of 3.4 years. Meanwhile, only 1
diuretic (furosemide 20 mg/day) as an out-     glomeruli contained lamellated argyrophil        of 66 (1.5%) in the placebo group had a
patient was unsuccessful, and she began to     mesangial nodules. Occasional afferent           comparable clinical course. Gault and Fer-
experience dyspnea on exertion. She was,       arterioles showed hyalinosis, and mild           nandez (3) reported a type 1 diabetic
therefore, admitted to our hospital in Janu-   tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis were   patient in whom enalapril, started after 10
ary 1999. Her body weight was 52 kg and        present. Immunofluorescence revealed lin-        years of nephrotic-range proteinuria,
blood pressure was 160/83 mmHg on              ear localization of IgG along the glomeru-       resulted in stable renal function and disap-
admission. Examination of the ocular fundi     lar capillary walls. Electron microscopy         pearance of proteinuria. McGregor and
revealed microaneurysms and dot hemor-         showed a marked increase in the mesangial        Bailey (4) reported that treatment with
rhages without exudates. There were signs      matrix in association with thickening of         captopril or enalapril in 2 type 1 diabetic
of diabetic neuropathy, including decreased    capillary basement membrane. Electron-           patients with nephropathy resulted in sta-


DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000                                                                                             709

===== PDF PAGE 11 of 17 (reading order, same page) =====
Letters

Figure 1—Clinical course of the patient.

patient’s 24-h urinary protein excretion
declined markedly to 0.5 g within 2 weeks
(Fig. 1). Blood pressure and serum albumin levels also improved to 130/70 mmHg
and 37 g/l, respectively. The patient was
followed at the outpatient clinic after discharge from the hospital. However, in May
1998, she stopped coming to the clinic and
discontinued all of her medications.
The patient, however, apparently
remained well until December 1998 when
she developed leg edema in association
with an increase in body weight from 45 to
48 kg within a month. She was subsequently seen again at our hospital. Her
blood pressure was 171/89 mmHg and urinalysis revealed 3 proteinuria. Her chest
X-ray revealed mild pleural effusions. An
attempt to control her edema with a
diuretic (furosemide 20 mg/day) as an outpatient was unsuccessful, and she began to
experience dyspnea on exertion. She was,
therefore, admitted to our hospital in January 1999. Her body weight was 52 kg and
blood pressure was 160/83 mmHg on
admission. Examination of the ocular fundi
revealed microaneurysms and dot hemorrhages without exudates. There were signs
of diabetic neuropathy, including decreased
DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000

vibratory sensation and an orthostatic drop
of blood pressure. Laboratory studies
revealed a postprandial plasma glucose
level of 15.3 µmol/l, an HbA1c concentration of 6.2%, a serum creatinine level of
44.2 µmol/l, a serum albumin level of 24
g/l, and a serum cholesterol level of 4.89
µmol/l. The 24-h urinary excretion was 6.2 g
and creatinine clearance was 1.07 ml/s.
Chest X-rays showed moderate pleural
effusions. Renal biopsy was performed in
the hospital to clarify the etiology of
repeated nephrotic-range proteinuria, with
written informed consent from the patient.
The specimen for light microscopy contained 9 glomeruli, of which 1 was globally
sclerotic and the rest showed diffuse intercapillary glomerulosclerosis without cellular proliferation. More than half of the
glomeruli contained lamellated argyrophil
mesangial nodules. Occasional afferent
arterioles showed hyalinosis, and mild
tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis were
present. Immunofluorescence revealed linear localization of IgG along the glomerular capillary walls. Electron microscopy
showed a marked increase in the mesangial
matrix in association with thickening of
capillary basement membrane. Electron-

dense deposits were absent. The histological diagnosis based on these findings was
diffuse and nodular diabetic glomerulosclerosis. Temocapril (2 mg/day) was re-started
and the dose of furosemide was increased
to 40 mg a day after renal biopsy. Efonidipine (Landel), 40 mg/day was added a few
days later. Insulin therapy (4U with NPH
insulin at breakfast) was used to control
hyperglycemia for a week, and later
replaced with gliclazide (40 mg/day). The
24-h urinary protein excretion declined
again markedly to 1.6 g within a month
after starting temocapril (Fig. 1). Pleural
effusions and edema disappeared and her
body weight decreased to 41 kg. Blood
pressure and serum albumin levels also
improved to 120/70 mmHg and 28 g/l,
respectively. A month after admission, she
was asymptomatic and was discharged
from the hospital.
It has long been thought that the
appearance of persistent proteinuria heralds a progressive decline of renal function
during the natural history of diabetic
nephropathy, and that nephrotic-range
proteinuria, in particular, points toward a
poor renal prognosis (1). Meanwhile,
many recent studies have demonstrated
that antihypertensive therapy can slow the
rate of decline of renal function in diabetic
nephropathy. Furthermore, it was suggested in more recent studies that ACE
inhibitors reduce proteinuria and protect
renal function in patients with diabetic
nephropathy more effectively than other
antihypertensive agents, and that this
renoprotective effect of ACE inhibitors is
independent of changes in blood pressure
(5). Some studies have shown that type 1
diabetic patients with nephrotic-range
proteinuria can maintain stable renal function with a marked reduction of proteinuria on ACE inhibitors (2–4). Herbert et
al. (2) reported that 7 of 42 (16.7%) type 1
diabetic patients with nephrotic-range
proteinuria treated with captopril achieved
remission of proteinuria and maintained
stable renal function over a mean followup period of 3.4 years. Meanwhile, only 1
of 66 (1.5%) in the placebo group had a
comparable clinical course. Gault and Fernandez (3) reported a type 1 diabetic
patient in whom enalapril, started after 10
years of nephrotic-range proteinuria,
resulted in stable renal function and disappearance of proteinuria. McGregor and
Bailey (4) reported that treatment with
captopril or enalapril in 2 type 1 diabetic
patients with nephropathy resulted in sta709


===== PDF PAGE 12 of 17 (pdftotext -layout) =====
Letters


ble renal function and remission of                    serial glomerular filtration rate and the        rate insulin sensitivity and strengthen the
nephrotic-range proteinuria for over 11                progression of diabetic glomerular disease.      potency of insulin secretion even in those
years. In these 3 reports, nephrotic-range             J Am Soc Nephrol 3:1358–1370, 1993               with the same genetic background (4,5). In
proteinuria disappeared gradually over a            2. Herbert LA, Bain RP, Verme D, Cattran D,         Japan, the increase in personal cars and
few years on ACE inhibitors. Moreover,                 Whittier FC, Tolchin N, Rohde RD, Lewis          traffic networks has mushroomed since the
                                                       EJ: Remission of nephrotic range protein-
these were all type 1 diabetic patients of             uria in type 1 diabetes. Kidney Int 46:1688–
                                                                                                        late 1960s. Transportation and a Western-
relatively young age (30 years old), in               1693, 1994                                       ized diet, including high fat and animal
contrast to our patient.                            3. Gault HM, Fernandez D: Stable renal              protein, have combined to affect the entire
     We documented a 69-year-old type 2                function in insulin-dependent diabetes           population of Japan. Younger Japanese,
diabetic woman with histologically proven              mellitus 10 years after nephrotic range          born during or after the 1960s, grew up
diabetic nephropathy in whom rapid                     proteinuria. Nephron 72:86–92, 1996              with a Westernized lifestyle, and we
remission of nephrotic-range proteinuria            4. McGregor D, Bailey RR: Over 11 years of          hypothesize that continuous exposure to
was observed within a month on an ACE                  stable renal function after remission of         such environmental factors during growth
inhibitor, temocapril, on 2 separate occa-             nephrotic-range proteinuria in type 1 dia-       may strengthen the potency of insulin
sions. As shown in Fig. 1, the reduction of            betics treated with an ACE inhibitor.            secretion and promote compensatory
                                                       Nephron 76:270–275, 1997
proteinuria occurred in association with a          5. Lewis EJ, Hunsicker LG, Bain RP, Rohde
                                                                                                        hyperinsulin secretion in an insulin-resis-
decrease in creatinine clearance, although             RD: The effect of angiotensin-converting-        tant state after maturity. To certify our
the magnitude of the former by far                     enzyme inhibition on diabetic nephropa-          hypothesis, we compared the insulin
exceeded that of the latter. The mechanism             thy: the Collaborative Study Group. N Engl       response to an oral glucose load in younger
of the reduction of glomerular proteinuria             J Med 329:1456–1462, 1993                        Japanese adult IGT subjects (20–39 years)
by ACE inhibitors is still disputed. Imanishi       6. Imanishi M, Yoshioka K, Okumura M,               with that of subjects 40 years in a 75-g
et al. (6) suggested that ACE inhibitors               Konishi Y, Tanaka S, Fujii S, Kimura G:          oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT).
reduce albuminuria in diabetic nephropa-               Mechanism of decreased albuminuria                    A series of 2,142 Japanese subjects,
thy by decreasing the glomerular capillary             caused by angiotensin converting enzyme          1,361 men and 781 women aged 20–82
pressure and improving hyperfiltration via             inhibitor in early diabetic nephropathy.         years (mean: 56 years), suspected of having
                                                       Kidney Int 52 (Suppl. 63):198–200, 1997
efferent arteriolar dilatation. Meanwhile,          7. Rumuzzi A, Ruggenenti P, Mosconi L, Pata
                                                                                                        diabetes, underwent a 75-g OGTT (0–3 h)
other investigators have suggested                     V, Viberti G, Remuzzi G: Effect of low-dose      for diagnosis at Tokyo Saiseikai Central
improvement of size selectivity of the                 enalapril on glomerular size-selectivity in      Hospital and Juntendo University Hospital
glomerular capillary membrane by ACE                   human diabetic nephropathy. J Nephrol 6:         from January 1996 to December 1998.
inhibitors (7). Whatever the mechanism                 36–43, 1993                                      They were divided into 3 groups using cur-
involved, reduction of proteinuria by ACE           8. Remizzi G, Bertani T: Is glomerulosclerosis      rent World Health Organization criteria,
inhibitors in patients with diabetic                   a consequence of altered glomerular per-         and 831 subjects were diagnosed with IGT.
nephropathy is expected to have a benefi-              meability to macromolecules? Kidney Int          The IGT subjects aged 56 ± 0.4 (mean ±
cial effect on renal prognosis, since protein-         38:384–394, 1990                                 SEM, M/F 521/310) were divided into 5
uria itself is considered nephrotoxic and to                                                            groups by age (39, 40–49, 50–59,
be a promoter of progressive renal dysfunc-                                                             60–69, and 70 years) and compared with
tion (8). Our report, for the first time,          Interesting Insulin                                  3 insulin sensitivity and secretion parame-
demonstrated that an ACE inhibitor could           Response to Oral                                     ters among age-groups. The homeostasis
exert a rapid beneficial effect on nephrotic       Glucose Load in                                      model assessment of insulin resistance
syndrome due to diabetic nephropathy in                                                                 (HOMA-IR), a marker of insulin resistance,
an elderly patient with type 2 diabetes.           Young Japanese                                       was calculated as fasting plasma glucose
Although the experience is limited to a sin-       Subjects With                                        (mg/dl)          fasting plasma insulin
gle patient, it is should be worth attempting                                                           (µU/ml)/405 converted from the original
to treat such patients with ACE inhibitors.
                                                   Impaired Glucose                                     formula (6). The insulinogenic index (IsIx),
                                                   Tolerance                                            a marker of early insulin secretion, was
                         RYUJI SUZUKI, MD                                                               defined as insulin/ PG, or (Insulin30–
                                                             e recently reported that the degree        Insulin0)/(PG30–PG0) (7). The area under

                                                   W
                       AKIRA SHIMADA, MD
                    KONOSUKE KONISHI, MD                     of insulin response in Japanese            the insulin curve (AUCins), a marker of total
                       TAKAO SARUTA, MD                      subjects with impaired glucose             insulin secretion, was calculated as the total
                                                   tolerance (IGT) and diabetes to 75-g oral            area under the insulin response curve dur-
From the Department of Internal Medicine, Keio     glucose load (1) is much lower than that in          ing the 3-h OGTT.
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.       Caucasian subjects (2,3). Japanese-Ameri-                 Surprisingly, HOMA-IR, IsIx, and
    Address correspondence to Akira Shimada, MD,
Department of Internal Medicine, Keio Univer-
                                                   can IGT or diabetic subjects in Hawaii and           AUCins, in the youngest age-group (39
sity School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, Shin-    Seattle, Washington, however, showed                 years), are all significantly and notably
juku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan. E-mail: n2518@     much higher insulin resistance and com-              higher than in the other age-groups (Fig. 1).
med.keio.ac.jp.                                    pensatory hyper-response to insulin secre-           Although our study groups are not large
                                                   tion than native Japanese subjects. This             and other clinical characteristics, such as
References                                         suggests that environmental factors of               family history of diabetes, BMI, lipid pro-
 1. Austin SM, Lieberman JS, Newton LD,            lifestyle, such as a high-fat and high-pro-          files, or blood pressure, were not evalu-
    Mejia M, Peters WA, Myers BD: Slope of         tein diet and/or less exercise, may deterio-         ated, the result supports our hypothesis,


710                                                                                                   DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000

===== PDF PAGE 12 of 17 (reading order, same page) =====
Letters

ble renal function and remission of
nephrotic-range proteinuria for over 11
years. In these 3 reports, nephrotic-range
proteinuria disappeared gradually over a
few years on ACE inhibitors. Moreover,
these were all type 1 diabetic patients of
relatively young age (30 years old), in
contrast to our patient.
We documented a 69-year-old type 2
diabetic woman with histologically proven
diabetic nephropathy in whom rapid
remission of nephrotic-range proteinuria
was observed within a month on an ACE
inhibitor, temocapril, on 2 separate occasions. As shown in Fig. 1, the reduction of
proteinuria occurred in association with a
decrease in creatinine clearance, although
the magnitude of the former by far
exceeded that of the latter. The mechanism
of the reduction of glomerular proteinuria
by ACE inhibitors is still disputed. Imanishi
et al. (6) suggested that ACE inhibitors
reduce albuminuria in diabetic nephropathy by decreasing the glomerular capillary
pressure and improving hyperfiltration via
efferent arteriolar dilatation. Meanwhile,
other investigators have suggested
improvement of size selectivity of the
glomerular capillary membrane by ACE
inhibitors (7). Whatever the mechanism
involved, reduction of proteinuria by ACE
inhibitors in patients with diabetic
nephropathy is expected to have a beneficial effect on renal prognosis, since proteinuria itself is considered nephrotoxic and to
be a promoter of progressive renal dysfunction (8). Our report, for the first time,
demonstrated that an ACE inhibitor could
exert a rapid beneficial effect on nephrotic
syndrome due to diabetic nephropathy in
an elderly patient with type 2 diabetes.
Although the experience is limited to a single patient, it is should be worth attempting
to treat such patients with ACE inhibitors.
RYUJI SUZUKI, MD
AKIRA SHIMADA, MD
KONOSUKE KONISHI, MD
TAKAO SARUTA, MD
From the Department of Internal Medicine, Keio
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
Address correspondence to Akira Shimada, MD,
Department of Internal Medicine, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan. E-mail: n2518@
med.keio.ac.jp.

References
1. Austin SM, Lieberman JS, Newton LD,
Mejia M, Peters WA, Myers BD: Slope of
710

serial glomerular filtration rate and the
progression of diabetic glomerular disease.
J Am Soc Nephrol 3:1358–1370, 1993
2. Herbert LA, Bain RP, Verme D, Cattran D,
Whittier FC, Tolchin N, Rohde RD, Lewis
EJ: Remission of nephrotic range proteinuria in type 1 diabetes. Kidney Int 46:1688–
1693, 1994
3. Gault HM, Fernandez D: Stable renal
function in insulin-dependent diabetes
mellitus 10 years after nephrotic range
proteinuria. Nephron 72:86–92, 1996
4. McGregor D, Bailey RR: Over 11 years of
stable renal function after remission of
nephrotic-range proteinuria in type 1 diabetics treated with an ACE inhibitor.
Nephron 76:270–275, 1997
5. Lewis EJ, Hunsicker LG, Bain RP, Rohde
RD: The effect of angiotensin-convertingenzyme inhibition on diabetic nephropathy: the Collaborative Study Group. N Engl
J Med 329:1456–1462, 1993
6. Imanishi M, Yoshioka K, Okumura M,
Konishi Y, Tanaka S, Fujii S, Kimura G:
Mechanism of decreased albuminuria
caused by angiotensin converting enzyme
inhibitor in early diabetic nephropathy.
Kidney Int 52 (Suppl. 63):198–200, 1997
7. Rumuzzi A, Ruggenenti P, Mosconi L, Pata
V, Viberti G, Remuzzi G: Effect of low-dose
enalapril on glomerular size-selectivity in
human diabetic nephropathy. J Nephrol 6:
36–43, 1993
8. Remizzi G, Bertani T: Is glomerulosclerosis
a consequence of altered glomerular permeability to macromolecules? Kidney Int
38:384–394, 1990

Interesting Insulin
Response to Oral
Glucose Load in
Young Japanese
Subjects With
Impaired Glucose
Tolerance
e recently reported that the degree
of insulin response in Japanese
subjects with impaired glucose
tolerance (IGT) and diabetes to 75-g oral
glucose load (1) is much lower than that in
Caucasian subjects (2,3). Japanese-American IGT or diabetic subjects in Hawaii and
Seattle, Washington, however, showed
much higher insulin resistance and compensatory hyper-response to insulin secretion than native Japanese subjects. This
suggests that environmental factors of
lifestyle, such as a high-fat and high-protein diet and/or less exercise, may deterio-

W

rate insulin sensitivity and strengthen the
potency of insulin secretion even in those
with the same genetic background (4,5). In
Japan, the increase in personal cars and
traffic networks has mushroomed since the
late 1960s. Transportation and a Westernized diet, including high fat and animal
protein, have combined to affect the entire
population of Japan. Younger Japanese,
born during or after the 1960s, grew up
with a Westernized lifestyle, and we
hypothesize that continuous exposure to
such environmental factors during growth
may strengthen the potency of insulin
secretion and promote compensatory
hyperinsulin secretion in an insulin-resistant state after maturity. To certify our
hypothesis, we compared the insulin
response to an oral glucose load in younger
Japanese adult IGT subjects (20–39 years)
with that of subjects 40 years in a 75-g
oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT).
A series of 2,142 Japanese subjects,
1,361 men and 781 women aged 20–82
years (mean: 56 years), suspected of having
diabetes, underwent a 75-g OGTT (0–3 h)
for diagnosis at Tokyo Saiseikai Central
Hospital and Juntendo University Hospital
from January 1996 to December 1998.
They were divided into 3 groups using current World Health Organization criteria,
and 831 subjects were diagnosed with IGT.
The IGT subjects aged 56 ± 0.4 (mean ±
SEM, M/F 521/310) were divided into 5
groups by age (39, 40–49, 50–59,
60–69, and 70 years) and compared with
3 insulin sensitivity and secretion parameters among age-groups. The homeostasis
model assessment of insulin resistance
(HOMA-IR), a marker of insulin resistance,
was calculated as fasting plasma glucose
(mg/dl)
fasting plasma insulin
(µU/ml)/405 converted from the original
formula (6). The insulinogenic index (IsIx),
a marker of early insulin secretion, was
defined as insulin/ PG, or (Insulin30–
Insulin0)/(PG30–PG0) (7). The area under
the insulin curve (AUCins), a marker of total
insulin secretion, was calculated as the total
area under the insulin response curve during the 3-h OGTT.
Surprisingly, HOMA-IR, IsIx, and
AUCins, in the youngest age-group (39
years), are all significantly and notably
higher than in the other age-groups (Fig. 1).
Although our study groups are not large
and other clinical characteristics, such as
family history of diabetes, BMI, lipid profiles, or blood pressure, were not evaluated, the result supports our hypothesis,
DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000


===== PDF PAGE 13 of 17 (pdftotext -layout) =====
                                                                                                                                                Letters


                                                                                                      ment of both diabetes and atherosclerosis
                                                                                                      from IGT in young subjects. It should be
                                                                                                      of great interest to determine whether and
                                                                                                      how the Westernized lifestyle during
                                                                                                      growth may upregulate pancreatic -cell
                                                                                                      growth or function and affect the potency
                                                                                                      of insulin secretion in adults. We view this
                                                                                                      as a very important research direction in
                                                                                                      the etiology of diabetes and atherosclerosis
                                                                                                      in Japan and other rapidly developing and
                                                                                                      Westernized countries.

                                                                                                                              YASUSHI TANAKA, MD
                                                                                                                            YOSHIHITO ATSUMI, MD
                                                                                                                            KENPEI MATSUOKA, MD
                                                                                                                               TOMIO ONUMA, MD
                                                                                                                             RYUZO KAWAMORI, MD
                                                                                                      From the Department of Medicine (Y.T., T.O., R.K.),
                                                                                                      Metabolism and Endocrinology, School of Medi-
                                                                                                      cine, Juntendo University; and the Department of
                                                                                                      Medicine (Y.A., K.M.), Tokyo Saiseikai Central Hos-
                                                                                                      pital, Tokyo, Japan.
                                                                                                         Address correspondence to Yasushi Tanaka, MD,
                                                                                                      Department of Medicine, Metabolism and
                                                                                                      Endocrinology, School of Medicine, Juntendo Uni-
                                                                                                      versity, 2-1-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8421,
                                                                                                      Japan. E-mail: y-tanaka@med.juntendo.ac.jp.



                                                                                                      References
                                                                                                       1. Tanaka Y, Atsumi Y, Asahina T, Hosokawa
                                                                                                          K, Matsuoka K, Kinoshita J, Onuma T,
                                                                                                          Kawamori R: Usefulness of revised fasting
                                                                                                          plasma glucose criterion and characteristics
                                                                                                          of the insulin response to an oral glucose
                                                                                                          load in newly diagnosed Japanese diabetic
                                                                                                          subjects. Diabetes Care 21:1133–1137,
                                                                                                          1998
                                                                                                       2. DeFronzo RA: The triumvirate: -cell,
                                                                                                          muscle, liver: a collusion responsible for
                                                                                                          NIDDM. Diabetes 37:667–687, 1988
                                                                                                       3. DeFronzo RA: Pathogenesis of type 2 (non-
Figure 1—Clinical markers for insulin sensitivity and secretion during the 75-g OGTT in 831 Japan-        insulin dependent) diabetes: a balanced
ese subjects with IGT. Values are expressed as means ± SEM. Numbers of subjects are shown in paren-       overview. Diabetologia 35:389–397, 1992
theses. *P  0.05 vs. the group aged 40–49 years; **P  0.01 vs. the group aged 59 years; †P         4. Hara H, Egusa G, Yamakido M, Kawate R:
0.01 vs. the group aged 60–69 years.                                                                      The high prevalence of diabetes mellitus
                                                                                                          and hyperinsulinemia among Japanese-
                                                                                                          Americans living in Hawaii and Los Ange-
                                                                                                          les. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 24:S37–S42,
namely that the generation of Japanese             Caucasians and Japanese-Americans.                     1994
IGT subjects 39 years of age, as com-             Although the present study is preliminary,          5. Fujimoto WY, Leonetti DL, Kinyoun JL,
pared with older subjects, have a strong           results suggest that the number of Japan-              Newell-Morris L, Shuman WP, Stolov WC,
potential of insulin secretion under an            ese IGT subjects retaining long-term IGT               Wahl PW: Prevalence of diabetes mellitus
insulin-resistant state. It has been assumed       through strong insulin secretion will                  and impaired glucose tolerance among sec-
that Japanese subjects develop overt dia-          increase. The results further suggest that             ond-generation Japanese-American men.
betes from IGT much earlier than Cau-              the development of insulin resistance and              Diabetes 36:721–729, 1987
casian subjects because of exposure to fac-        compensatory hyperinsulinemia-related               6. Matthews DR, Hosker JP, Rudenski AS,
                                                                                                          Naylor BA, Treacher DF, Turner RC:
tors causing insulin resistance, such as           atherosclerotic disease, observed in syn-
                                                                                                          Homeostasis model assessment: insulin
obesity, less exercise, or excessive stress.       drome X (8) or insulin resistance syn-                 resistance and -cell function from fasting
This may be the result of Japanese subjects        drome (9) of Caucasians, will also increase            plasma glucose and insulin concentrations
having weaker potency of insulin secretion         in Japan in the near future. We must,                  in man. Diabetologia 28:412–419, 1985
and maximal compensatory hypersecre-               therefore, start further large-scale epidemi-       7. Kosaka K, Kuzuya T, Yoshinaga H, Hagura
tion of insulin that are less than those of        ological studies focusing on the develop-              R: A prospective study of health check


DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000                                                                                                        711

===== PDF PAGE 13 of 17 (reading order, same page) =====
Letters

ment of both diabetes and atherosclerosis
from IGT in young subjects. It should be
of great interest to determine whether and
how the Westernized lifestyle during
growth may upregulate pancreatic -cell
growth or function and affect the potency
of insulin secretion in adults. We view this
as a very important research direction in
the etiology of diabetes and atherosclerosis
in Japan and other rapidly developing and
Westernized countries.
YASUSHI TANAKA, MD
YOSHIHITO ATSUMI, MD
KENPEI MATSUOKA, MD
TOMIO ONUMA, MD
RYUZO KAWAMORI, MD
From the Department of Medicine (Y.T., T.O., R.K.),
Metabolism and Endocrinology, School of Medicine, Juntendo University; and the Department of
Medicine (Y.A., K.M.), Tokyo Saiseikai Central Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
Address correspondence to Yasushi Tanaka, MD,
Department of Medicine, Metabolism and
Endocrinology, School of Medicine, Juntendo University, 2-1-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8421,
Japan. E-mail: y-tanaka@med.juntendo.ac.jp.

Figure 1—Clinical markers for insulin sensitivity and secretion during the 75-g OGTT in 831 Japanese subjects with IGT. Values are expressed as means ± SEM. Numbers of subjects are shown in parentheses. *P  0.05 vs. the group aged 40–49 years; **P  0.01 vs. the group aged 59 years; †P 
0.01 vs. the group aged 60–69 years.

namely that the generation of Japanese
IGT subjects 39 years of age, as compared with older subjects, have a strong
potential of insulin secretion under an
insulin-resistant state. It has been assumed
that Japanese subjects develop overt diabetes from IGT much earlier than Caucasian subjects because of exposure to factors causing insulin resistance, such as
obesity, less exercise, or excessive stress.
This may be the result of Japanese subjects
having weaker potency of insulin secretion
and maximal compensatory hypersecretion of insulin that are less than those of
DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000

Caucasians and Japanese-Americans.
Although the present study is preliminary,
results suggest that the number of Japanese IGT subjects retaining long-term IGT
through strong insulin secretion will
increase. The results further suggest that
the development of insulin resistance and
compensatory hyperinsulinemia-related
atherosclerotic disease, observed in syndrome X (8) or insulin resistance syndrome (9) of Caucasians, will also increase
in Japan in the near future. We must,
therefore, start further large-scale epidemiological studies focusing on the develop-

References
1. Tanaka Y, Atsumi Y, Asahina T, Hosokawa
K, Matsuoka K, Kinoshita J, Onuma T,
Kawamori R: Usefulness of revised fasting
plasma glucose criterion and characteristics
of the insulin response to an oral glucose
load in newly diagnosed Japanese diabetic
subjects. Diabetes Care 21:1133–1137,
1998
2. DeFronzo RA: The triumvirate: -cell,
muscle, liver: a collusion responsible for
NIDDM. Diabetes 37:667–687, 1988
3. DeFronzo RA: Pathogenesis of type 2 (noninsulin dependent) diabetes: a balanced
overview. Diabetologia 35:389–397, 1992
4. Hara H, Egusa G, Yamakido M, Kawate R:
The high prevalence of diabetes mellitus
and hyperinsulinemia among JapaneseAmericans living in Hawaii and Los Angeles. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 24:S37–S42,
1994
5. Fujimoto WY, Leonetti DL, Kinyoun JL,
Newell-Morris L, Shuman WP, Stolov WC,
Wahl PW: Prevalence of diabetes mellitus
and impaired glucose tolerance among second-generation Japanese-American men.
Diabetes 36:721–729, 1987
6. Matthews DR, Hosker JP, Rudenski AS,
Naylor BA, Treacher DF, Turner RC:
Homeostasis model assessment: insulin
resistance and -cell function from fasting
plasma glucose and insulin concentrations
in man. Diabetologia 28:412–419, 1985
7. Kosaka K, Kuzuya T, Yoshinaga H, Hagura
R: A prospective study of health check
711


===== PDF PAGE 14 of 17 (pdftotext -layout) =====
Letters


    examinees for the development of non-        proportionalities linear, logarithmic, or                  2000
    insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus: rela-   otherwise? The study presupposes that                   2. Matsuda M, DeFronzo R: Insulin sensitivity
    tionship of the incidence of diabetes with   they are linear. Is there any theoretical jus-             indices obtained from oral glucose toler-
    the initial insulinogenic index and degree   tification for this supposition?                           ance testing. Diabetes Care 22:1462–1470,
    of obesity. Diabet Med 13 (Suppl. 6):S120–                                                              1999
    S126, 1996                                                             JOSE S. CHENG, MD
 8. Reaven GM, Laws A: Insulin resistance,
    compensatory insulinemia, and coronary
    heart disease. Diabetologia 37:948–952,
                                                 From the Department of Family and Community            Effect of Gluten-Free
                                                 Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
    1994                                         Texas.                                                 Diet on the
 9. DeFronzo RA, Ferannini E: Insulin resis-
    tance: a multifocal syndrome responsible
                                                    Address correspondence to Jose S. Cheng, MD,
                                                 3825 Tennyson St., Houston, TX 77005-2851.
                                                                                                        Metabolic Control of
    for NIDDM, obesity, hypertension, dyslipi-   E-mail: jcheng@bcm.tmc.edu.                            Type 1 Diabetes in
    demia, and atherosclerotic cardiovascular                                                           Patients With
    disease. Diabetes Care 14:173–194, 1991
                                                 References                                             Diabetes and
                                                  1. Matsuda M, DeFronzo R: Insulin sensitiv-
                                                     ity indices obtained from oral glucose tol-        Celiac Disease
      COMMENTS AND                                   erance testing: comparison with the eugly-
                                                     cemic insulin clamp. Diabetes Care 22:                    reviously (1), we described an
        RESPONSES

An Equation for
                                                     1462–1470, 1999


                                                 Response to Cheng
                                                                                                        P      increased frequency of hypoglycemic
                                                                                                               episodes with a reduction in insulin
                                                                                                        requirement as a presenting sign of celiac
                                                                                                        disease in children with type 1 diabetes. In
Insulin Sensitivity                                                                                     a study conducted at a different center in
                                                    n response to Dr. Cheng (1), it should              Italy, similar data were observed: 6 well-
Index
         atsuda and DeFronzo (1) pre-
                                                 I  be noted that expressing the units of
                                                    glucose and insulin as mmol/l and
                                                 pmol/l, respectively (instead of mg/dl and
                                                                                                        controlled patients (mean GHb value 8.7 ±
                                                                                                        2.2%) had significantly more hypoglycemic
                                                                                                        episodes before diagnosis of celiac disease

M        sented a novel method of estimat-
         ing insulin sensitivity from data
obtained by an oral glucose tolerance test.
They correlated the values thus obtained
                                                 µU/ml), will not change any of the
                                                 observed correlations.
                                                      As we described (2), the simplified
                                                 equation for the insulin sensitivity index
                                                                                                        when compared with 12 well-matched dia-
                                                                                                        betic patients without celiac disease (4.3 ±
                                                                                                        2.0 vs. 1.5 ± 2.4 episodes/week, respec-
                                                                                                        tively). This difference persisted up to
with values from the same subjects with          (ISI) [ISI = 10,000/(FPG FPI)] cited in                6 months after initiation of a gluten-free
the euglycemic clamp technique. The              Dr. Cheng’s letter is mathematically equiv-            diet (6.6 ± 6.2 vs. 1.8 ± 4.2 episodes/week)
results are significant, and the effort is       alent to the inverse of the reduced home-              (F.C., personal communication).
commendable. To stimulate further dis-           ostasis model assessment formula, in                        In contrast, Kaukinen et al. (2) failed to
cussion, I would like to proffer the follow-     which k = 10,000.                                      find an impact on metabolic control in
ing questions:                                        We examined the relationship between              adult patients with type 1 diabetes and
      In the study, fasting plasma glucose       our proposed ISI and the measurement of                celiac disease when a gluten-free diet was
(FPG) and glucose (G) are expressed in           insulin sensitivity obtained from the                  inadequate. It is worth noting that the mean
mg/dl, and fasting plasma insulin (FPI) and      euglycemic insulin clamp by use of both                GHb value in these patients ranged from
insulin (I) are expressed in µl/ml. In a bio-    the log of the insulin concentration (r =              9.8 to 10% during the 3 years preceding
logical system, the action of insulin on glu-    0.69 and P  0.0001) and the absolute                  the diagnosis of celiac disease and remained
cose proceeds at the molecular level. Will       plasma insulin concentration (r = 0.73 and             substantially unchanged (9.5–10.3%) dur-
it, then, be more consistent to express FPG      P  0.0001). The correlation coefficients              ing the year after the initiation of a gluten-
and G in M 3/l, and FPI and I in M 12/l?         were quite similar.                                    free diet. Similarly, the average daily insulin
      The composite equation for the                                                                    dosage (0.6 U/kg) remained unchanged
insulin sensitivity index (ISI) states that                         RALPH A. DEFRONZO, MD               after the start of a gluten-free diet. In our
                                     –                                                                  patients, the mean GHb value was 7.1 ±
                                         –
ISI = 10,000/√(FPG        FPI)      (G   I)      From the Diabetes Division, Department of Medi-        1.1% at the time of diagnosis of celiac dis-
                                                 cine, University of Texas Health Science Center at
                                   –             San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas.                       ease; the mean insulin requirement was 0.6
For simplicity, let us assume that G ap-            Address correspondence to Ralph A. DeFronzo,        U/kg body weight. This requirement was
                        –
proaches FPG and that I approaches FPI.          MD, Professor of Medicine, University of Texas         the mean final result of a progressive reduc-
The equation then simplifies to                  Health Science Center at San Antonio, Diabetes         tion of the dose ranging from 30 to
                                                 Divison, Department of Medicine, 7703 Floyd Curl
                                                 Dr., San Antonio, TX 78284-7886. E-mail: defronzo
                                                                                                           60% in individuals due to symptomatic
      ISI = 10,000/√(FPG2        FPI2)           @uthscsa.edu.                                          and asymptomatic hypoglycemic episodes.
                                                                                                             Thus, the lack of hypoglycemic
           10,000/(FPG       FPI)                                                                       episodes at the clinical onset of celiac dis-
                                                 References                                             eases in the patients described by Kauki-
This means that the ISI is inversely pro-         1. Cheng JS: An equation for insulin sensitiv-        nen et al. (2) could be the result of a
portional to FPG and to FPI. Are these               ity index (Letter). Diabetes Care 23:712,          higher mean blood glucose level as com-


712                                                                                                   DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000

===== PDF PAGE 14 of 17 (reading order, same page) =====
Letters

examinees for the development of noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus: relationship of the incidence of diabetes with
the initial insulinogenic index and degree
of obesity. Diabet Med 13 (Suppl. 6):S120–
S126, 1996
8. Reaven GM, Laws A: Insulin resistance,
compensatory insulinemia, and coronary
heart disease. Diabetologia 37:948–952,
1994
9. DeFronzo RA, Ferannini E: Insulin resistance: a multifocal syndrome responsible
for NIDDM, obesity, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and atherosclerotic cardiovascular
disease. Diabetes Care 14:173–194, 1991

COMMENTS AND
RESPONSES

atsuda and DeFronzo (1) presented a novel method of estimating insulin sensitivity from data
obtained by an oral glucose tolerance test.
They correlated the values thus obtained
with values from the same subjects with
the euglycemic clamp technique. The
results are significant, and the effort is
commendable. To stimulate further discussion, I would like to proffer the following questions:
In the study, fasting plasma glucose
(FPG) and glucose (G) are expressed in
mg/dl, and fasting plasma insulin (FPI) and
insulin (I) are expressed in µl/ml. In a biological system, the action of insulin on glucose proceeds at the molecular level. Will
it, then, be more consistent to express FPG
and G in M 3/l, and FPI and I in M 12/l?
The composite equation for the
insulin sensitivity index (ISI) states that

M

–
(G

FPI)

–
I)

–
For simplicity, let us assume that G ap–
proaches FPG and that I approaches FPI.
The equation then simplifies to
ISI = 10,000/√(FPG2
10,000/(FPG

FPI2)

712

From the Department of Family and Community
Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas.
Address correspondence to Jose S. Cheng, MD,
3825 Tennyson St., Houston, TX 77005-2851.
E-mail: jcheng@bcm.tmc.edu.

References
1. Matsuda M, DeFronzo R: Insulin sensitivity indices obtained from oral glucose tolerance testing: comparison with the euglycemic insulin clamp. Diabetes Care 22:
1462–1470, 1999

n response to Dr. Cheng (1), it should
be noted that expressing the units of
glucose and insulin as mmol/l and
pmol/l, respectively (instead of mg/dl and
µU/ml), will not change any of the
observed correlations.
As we described (2), the simplified
equation for the insulin sensitivity index
(ISI) [ISI = 10,000/(FPG FPI)] cited in
Dr. Cheng’s letter is mathematically equivalent to the inverse of the reduced homeostasis model assessment formula, in
which k = 10,000.
We examined the relationship between
our proposed ISI and the measurement of
insulin sensitivity obtained from the
euglycemic insulin clamp by use of both
the log of the insulin concentration (r =
0.69 and P  0.0001) and the absolute
plasma insulin concentration (r = 0.73 and
P  0.0001). The correlation coefficients
were quite similar.

I

RALPH A. DEFRONZO, MD
From the Diabetes Division, Department of Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center at
San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas.
Address correspondence to Ralph A. DeFronzo,
MD, Professor of Medicine, University of Texas
Health Science Center at San Antonio, Diabetes
Divison, Department of Medicine, 7703 Floyd Curl
Dr., San Antonio, TX 78284-7886. E-mail: defronzo
@uthscsa.edu.

FPI)

This means that the ISI is inversely proportional to FPG and to FPI. Are these

2000
2. Matsuda M, DeFronzo R: Insulin sensitivity
indices obtained from oral glucose tolerance testing. Diabetes Care 22:1462–1470,
1999

JOSE S. CHENG, MD

Response to Cheng

An Equation for
Insulin Sensitivity
Index

ISI = 10,000/√(FPG

proportionalities linear, logarithmic, or
otherwise? The study presupposes that
they are linear. Is there any theoretical justification for this supposition?

References
1. Cheng JS: An equation for insulin sensitivity index (Letter). Diabetes Care 23:712,

Effect of Gluten-Free
Diet on the
Metabolic Control of
Type 1 Diabetes in
Patients With
Diabetes and
Celiac Disease
reviously (1), we described an
increased frequency of hypoglycemic
episodes with a reduction in insulin
requirement as a presenting sign of celiac
disease in children with type 1 diabetes. In
a study conducted at a different center in
Italy, similar data were observed: 6 wellcontrolled patients (mean GHb value 8.7 ±
2.2%) had significantly more hypoglycemic
episodes before diagnosis of celiac disease
when compared with 12 well-matched diabetic patients without celiac disease (4.3 ±
2.0 vs. 1.5 ± 2.4 episodes/week, respectively). This difference persisted up to
6 months after initiation of a gluten-free
diet (6.6 ± 6.2 vs. 1.8 ± 4.2 episodes/week)
(F.C., personal communication).
In contrast, Kaukinen et al. (2) failed to
find an impact on metabolic control in
adult patients with type 1 diabetes and
celiac disease when a gluten-free diet was
inadequate. It is worth noting that the mean
GHb value in these patients ranged from
9.8 to 10% during the 3 years preceding
the diagnosis of celiac disease and remained
substantially unchanged (9.5–10.3%) during the year after the initiation of a glutenfree diet. Similarly, the average daily insulin
dosage (0.6 U/kg) remained unchanged
after the start of a gluten-free diet. In our
patients, the mean GHb value was 7.1 ±
1.1% at the time of diagnosis of celiac disease; the mean insulin requirement was 0.6
U/kg body weight. This requirement was
the mean final result of a progressive reduction of the dose ranging from 30 to
60% in individuals due to symptomatic
and asymptomatic hypoglycemic episodes.
Thus, the lack of hypoglycemic
episodes at the clinical onset of celiac diseases in the patients described by Kaukinen et al. (2) could be the result of a
higher mean blood glucose level as com-

P

DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000


===== PDF PAGE 15 of 17 (pdftotext -layout) =====
                                                                                                                                                  Letters


pared with our patients who received an                 were generally in good condition; most of              A gluten-free diet may be difficult to
intensified therapy and had a better meta-              them had only vague, if any, symptoms of          maintain for diabetic patients. Prospective
bolic control (as determined by GHb val-                celiac disease. More than likely, the risk of     studies are warranted to evaluate the qual-
ues). In patients maintained at a strict                hypoglycemia will be considerably greater         ity of life before and after the treatment of
metabolism (as our patients are), hypogly-              in patients suffering from a severe malab-        celiac disease in individuals with concomi-
cemic crisis and a reduction of insulin                 sorption. The risk may further differ             tant type 1 diabetes.
requirement may more easily manifest as                 between adults and children who have
signs of celiac disease.                                both celiac disease and diabetes.                                        KATRI KAUKINEN, MD
                                                             The low frequency of hypoglycemic                                      JORMA SALMI, MD
                     DARIO IAFUSCO, MD                  episodes does not refute our conclusion                                   JORMA LAHTELA, MD
                  FRANCESCO REA, MD, PH                 that a gluten-free diet has no influence on                                 HEIKKI OKSA, MD
             FRANCESCO CHIARELLI, MD, PH                the metabolic control of diabetes. Neverthe-                               PEKKA COLLIN, MD
                    ANGELIKA MOHN, MD                   less, we fully agree that, in some cases,
               FRANCESCO PRISCO, MD, PH                 hypoglycemia can be due to untreated              From the Department of Internal Medicine, Tam-
                                                        celiac disease. Celiac disease should be con-     pere University Hospital and Medical School, Uni-
From the Department of Pediatrics (D.I., F.R., F.P.),   sidered in type 1 diabetes patients who fre-      versity of Tampere, Tampere, Finland.
Second University of Naples, Naples; and the                                                                 Address correspondence to Pekka Collin, MD,
Department of Pediatrics (F.C., A.M.), University of    quently experience hypoglycemic events.           Medical School, University of Tampere, P.O. Box
Chieti, Chieti, Italy.                                  Furthermore, whenever the metabolic con-          607, FIN-33101 Tampere, Finland. E-mail:
   Address correspondence to Dario Iafusco, MD,         trol is poor in patients with concomitant         pekka.collin@uta.fi.
Department of Pediatrics, Second University of          diabetes and celiac disease, other autoim-
Naples, Via S. Andrea delle Dame n. 4, 80138
Naples, Italy. E-mail: dario.iafusco@unina2.it.
                                                        mune conditions should be considered.
                                                        The coexistence of celiac disease, type 1
                                                        diabetes, and autoimmune thyroid disease          References
                                                                                                           1. Iafusco D, Rea F, Chiarelli F, Mohn A,
References                                              or Addison’s disease is not uncommon (3).
                                                                                                              Prisco F: Effect of gluten-free diet on the
 1. Iafusco D, Rea F, Prisco F: Hypoglycemia                 On the other hand, it is worth noting            metabolic control of type 1 diabetes in
    and reduction of the insulin requirement            that in the series of Chiarelli (1), hypogly-         patients with diabetes and celiac disease
    as a sign of celiac disease in children with        cemic events were even more frequent in               (Letter). Diabetes Care 23:712–713,
    IDDM (Letter). Diabetes Care 21:1379–               celiac patients who had maintained a                  2000
    1380, 1998
                                                        gluten-free diet for 6 months than they            2. The Diabetes Control and Complications
 2. Kaukinen K, Salmi J, Lahtela J, Siljamäki-
    Ojansuu U, Koivisto A-M, Oksa H, Collin             were before the start of the diet (6.6 and            Trial Research Group: Hypoglycemia in
                                                        4.3 episodes on average, respectively).               the Diabetes Control and Complications
    P: No effect of gluten-free diet on the
                                                        This observation, we feel, supports our               trial. Diabetes 46:271–286, 1997
    metabolic control of type 1 diabetes in
                                                        conclusion that gluten-free diet has, by           3. Kaukinen K, Collin P, Mykkänen A-H, Par-
    patients with diabetes and celiac disease
                                                                                                              tanen J, Mäki M, Salmi J: Celiac disease
    (Letter). Diabetes Care 22:1747–1748,               and large, little if any effect on the meta-
                                                                                                              and autoimmune endocrinologic disor-
    1999                                                bolic control of diabetes.                            ders. Dig Dis Sci 44:1428–1433, 1999
                                                             Restricting celiac screening to diabetic      4. Ladinser B, Rossipal E, Pittschieler K:
                                                        patients who suffer from hypoglycemic                 Endomysium antibodies in coeliac disease:
Response to                                             complications means that most cases                   an improved method. Gut 35:776–778,
Iafusco et al.                                          would remain undetected. According to                 1994
                                                        several reports, the prevalence of celiac          5. Dieterich W, Laag E, Schopper H, Volta U,
                                                        disease in type 1 diabetes is as high as              Ferguson A, Gillett H, Riecken EO, Schup-
Effect of gluten-free diet on the                       2–7%. Endomysial (4) and tissue transg-               pan D: Autoantibodies to tissue transgluta-
metabolic control of type 1                             lutaminase (5,6) antibody assays are                  minase as predictors of celiac disease. Gas-
diabetes in patients with diabetes                      highly specific tests and are sensitive               troenterology 115:1317–1321, 1998
                                                                                                           6. Sulkanen S, Halttunen T, Laurila K, Kolho
and celiac disease                                      enough to effectively screen for celiac dis-          K-L, Korponay-Szabo I, Sarnesto A, Savi-
                                                        ease. Therefore, it is now feasible to screen         lahti E, Collin P, Mäki M: Tissue transglut-
                                                        all patients with type 1 diabetes for celiac          aminase autoantibody enzyme-linked
      he letter of Iafusco et al. (1) suggests          disease; this has been our practice for

T
                                                                                                              immunosorbent assay in detecting celiac
      that the lack of hypoglycemic epi-                more than 10 years.                                   disease. Gastroenterology 115:1322–1328,
      sodes in patients with celiac disease                  We have not carried out active screen-           1998
and diabetes might be a consequence of                  ing only to improve the metabolic control          7. Selby PL: Osteopenia and diabetes. Diabet
poor glycemic control. Evidence shows                   of diabetes. We consider that our screen-             Med 5:423–428, 1988
that the risk for hypoglycemia is increased             ing policy is further justified for other rea-     8. Corazza GR, Di Sario A, Cecchetti L,
when the HbA1c percentage is low (2).                   sons. First, the aim is to treat celiac disease       Tarozzi C, Corrao G, Bernardi M, Gasbar-
                                                                                                              rini G: Bone mass and metabolism in
This phenomenon may indeed explain                      before overt malabsorption develops. Sec-
                                                                                                              patients with celiac disease. Gastroenterol-
why this complication was rarely observed               ond, osteopenia is a problem in both dia-             ogy 109:122–128, 1995
in our series, in which the mean HbA1c                  betes (7) and celiac disease (8). A low            9. Mustalahti K, Collin P, Sievänen H, Salmi
value of our patients varied from 8.5 to                bone mineral density can improve even in              J, Mäki M: Osteopenia in patients with
10%. However, we must also emphasize                    asymptomatic celiac patients when they                clinically silent coeliac disease warrants
that our untreated celiac disease patients              are placed on a gluten-free diet (9).                 screening. Lancet 354:744–745, 1999


DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000                                                                                                           713

===== PDF PAGE 15 of 17 (reading order, same page) =====
Letters

pared with our patients who received an
intensified therapy and had a better metabolic control (as determined by GHb values). In patients maintained at a strict
metabolism (as our patients are), hypoglycemic crisis and a reduction of insulin
requirement may more easily manifest as
signs of celiac disease.
DARIO IAFUSCO, MD
FRANCESCO REA, MD, PH
FRANCESCO CHIARELLI, MD, PH
ANGELIKA MOHN, MD
FRANCESCO PRISCO, MD, PH
From the Department of Pediatrics (D.I., F.R., F.P.),
Second University of Naples, Naples; and the
Department of Pediatrics (F.C., A.M.), University of
Chieti, Chieti, Italy.
Address correspondence to Dario Iafusco, MD,
Department of Pediatrics, Second University of
Naples, Via S. Andrea delle Dame n. 4, 80138
Naples, Italy. E-mail: dario.iafusco@unina2.it.

References
1. Iafusco D, Rea F, Prisco F: Hypoglycemia
and reduction of the insulin requirement
as a sign of celiac disease in children with
IDDM (Letter). Diabetes Care 21:1379–
1380, 1998
2. Kaukinen K, Salmi J, Lahtela J, SiljamäkiOjansuu U, Koivisto A-M, Oksa H, Collin
P: No effect of gluten-free diet on the
metabolic control of type 1 diabetes in
patients with diabetes and celiac disease
(Letter). Diabetes Care 22:1747–1748,
1999

Response to
Iafusco et al.
Effect of gluten-free diet on the
metabolic control of type 1
diabetes in patients with diabetes
and celiac disease
he letter of Iafusco et al. (1) suggests
that the lack of hypoglycemic episodes in patients with celiac disease
and diabetes might be a consequence of
poor glycemic control. Evidence shows
that the risk for hypoglycemia is increased
when the HbA1c percentage is low (2).
This phenomenon may indeed explain
why this complication was rarely observed
in our series, in which the mean HbA1c
value of our patients varied from 8.5 to
10%. However, we must also emphasize
that our untreated celiac disease patients

T

DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000

were generally in good condition; most of
them had only vague, if any, symptoms of
celiac disease. More than likely, the risk of
hypoglycemia will be considerably greater
in patients suffering from a severe malabsorption. The risk may further differ
between adults and children who have
both celiac disease and diabetes.
The low frequency of hypoglycemic
episodes does not refute our conclusion
that a gluten-free diet has no influence on
the metabolic control of diabetes. Nevertheless, we fully agree that, in some cases,
hypoglycemia can be due to untreated
celiac disease. Celiac disease should be considered in type 1 diabetes patients who frequently experience hypoglycemic events.
Furthermore, whenever the metabolic control is poor in patients with concomitant
diabetes and celiac disease, other autoimmune conditions should be considered.
The coexistence of celiac disease, type 1
diabetes, and autoimmune thyroid disease
or Addison’s disease is not uncommon (3).
On the other hand, it is worth noting
that in the series of Chiarelli (1), hypoglycemic events were even more frequent in
celiac patients who had maintained a
gluten-free diet for 6 months than they
were before the start of the diet (6.6 and
4.3 episodes on average, respectively).
This observation, we feel, supports our
conclusion that gluten-free diet has, by
and large, little if any effect on the metabolic control of diabetes.
Restricting celiac screening to diabetic
patients who suffer from hypoglycemic
complications means that most cases
would remain undetected. According to
several reports, the prevalence of celiac
disease in type 1 diabetes is as high as
2–7%. Endomysial (4) and tissue transglutaminase (5,6) antibody assays are
highly specific tests and are sensitive
enough to effectively screen for celiac disease. Therefore, it is now feasible to screen
all patients with type 1 diabetes for celiac
disease; this has been our practice for
more than 10 years.
We have not carried out active screening only to improve the metabolic control
of diabetes. We consider that our screening policy is further justified for other reasons. First, the aim is to treat celiac disease
before overt malabsorption develops. Second, osteopenia is a problem in both diabetes (7) and celiac disease (8). A low
bone mineral density can improve even in
asymptomatic celiac patients when they
are placed on a gluten-free diet (9).

A gluten-free diet may be difficult to
maintain for diabetic patients. Prospective
studies are warranted to evaluate the quality of life before and after the treatment of
celiac disease in individuals with concomitant type 1 diabetes.
KATRI KAUKINEN, MD
JORMA SALMI, MD
JORMA LAHTELA, MD
HEIKKI OKSA, MD
PEKKA COLLIN, MD
From the Department of Internal Medicine, Tampere University Hospital and Medical School, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland.
Address correspondence to Pekka Collin, MD,
Medical School, University of Tampere, P.O. Box
607, FIN-33101 Tampere, Finland. E-mail:
pekka.collin@uta.fi.

References
1. Iafusco D, Rea F, Chiarelli F, Mohn A,
Prisco F: Effect of gluten-free diet on the
metabolic control of type 1 diabetes in
patients with diabetes and celiac disease
(Letter). Diabetes Care 23:712–713,
2000
2. The Diabetes Control and Complications
Trial Research Group: Hypoglycemia in
the Diabetes Control and Complications
trial. Diabetes 46:271–286, 1997
3. Kaukinen K, Collin P, Mykkänen A-H, Partanen J, Mäki M, Salmi J: Celiac disease
and autoimmune endocrinologic disorders. Dig Dis Sci 44:1428–1433, 1999
4. Ladinser B, Rossipal E, Pittschieler K:
Endomysium antibodies in coeliac disease:
an improved method. Gut 35:776–778,
1994
5. Dieterich W, Laag E, Schopper H, Volta U,
Ferguson A, Gillett H, Riecken EO, Schuppan D: Autoantibodies to tissue transglutaminase as predictors of celiac disease. Gastroenterology 115:1317–1321, 1998
6. Sulkanen S, Halttunen T, Laurila K, Kolho
K-L, Korponay-Szabo I, Sarnesto A, Savilahti E, Collin P, Mäki M: Tissue transglutaminase autoantibody enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay in detecting celiac
disease. Gastroenterology 115:1322–1328,
1998
7. Selby PL: Osteopenia and diabetes. Diabet
Med 5:423–428, 1988
8. Corazza GR, Di Sario A, Cecchetti L,
Tarozzi C, Corrao G, Bernardi M, Gasbarrini G: Bone mass and metabolism in
patients with celiac disease. Gastroenterology 109:122–128, 1995
9. Mustalahti K, Collin P, Sievänen H, Salmi
J, Mäki M: Osteopenia in patients with
clinically silent coeliac disease warrants
screening. Lancet 354:744–745, 1999
713


===== PDF PAGE 16 of 17 (pdftotext -layout) =====
Letters



Prediction of                                                                   TIM CUNDY, MD           For this purpose, the cutoff values that we
                                                                               JOHN BAKER, MD           derived are satisfactory (4). They generally
Albumin Excretion                                                                                       provide a clear distinction of microalbu-
Rate From                                         From the Department of Medicine, University of
                                                  Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
                                                                                                        minuria from normal, because the diagnos-
Albumin-to-Creatinine                                 Address correspondence to Tim Cundy, MD,          tic values are far removed from the normal
                                                  Department of Medicine, Auckland Hospital, Pri-       population mean (5).
Ratio                                             vate Bag 92-019, Auckland 1, New Zealand. E-mail:          We found that the ACR had less
                                                  t.cundy@auckland.ac.nz.                               within-subject variation than timed over-
      wo recent articles in Diabetes Care                                                               night measurements (4). For this reason,

T     have continued the long-running
      debate about methods of screening
for albuminuria in diabetes (1,2). The crux
of this issue is whether the information that
                                                  References
                                                   1. Harvey JN, Hook K, Platts JK, Devarjoo S,
                                                      Meadows PA: Prediction of albumin excre-
                                                      tion rate from albumin-to-creatinine ratio
                                                                                                        coupled with its simplicity, we feel that the
                                                                                                        use of single samples with or without the
                                                                                                        conversion to 24-h albumin excretion
                                                                                                        rates, as advocated by Cundy and Baker, is
can be obtained from spot urine samples               (Letter). Diabetes Care 22:1597–1598, 1999        preferable for large surveys and routine
(either albumin concentration or the albu-         2. Bakker AJ: Detection of microalbuminuria:         clinical use.
min-to-creatinine ratio) can provide equiv-           receiver operating characteristic curve
alent information to a timed albumin                  analysis favors albumin-to-creatinine ratio                               JOHN N. HARVEY, MD
excretion rate, on which our current defin-           over albumin concentration. Diabetes Care
                                                      22:307–313, 1999                                  From the University of Wales College of Medicine,
itions of albuminuria are based. Spot sam-         3. Ginsberg JM, Chang BS, Matarese RA,               Wrexham Academic Unit, Wrexham, U.K.
ples have the huge advantage of not requir-           Garella S: Use of single-voided urine sam-           Address correspondence to John N. Harvey, MD,
ing accuracy of either timing or volume               ples to estimate quantitative proteinuria.        Diabetes Unit, Gladstone Centre, Maelor Hospital,
measurement, both of which are potent                 N Engl J Med 309:1543–1546, 1983                  Croesnewydd Road, Wrexham Clwyd LL13 7TD,
sources of patient dissatisfaction and error       4. Cockcroft DW, Gault MH: Prediction of             U.K. E-mail: john.harvey@new-tr.wales.nhs.uk.
in clinical practice.                                 creatinine clearance from serum creati-
     Harvey et al. (1) and Bakker (2) have            nine. Nephron 16:31–41, 1976
                                                                                                        References
estimated cutoff values for albumin-to-crea-       5. Cundy TF, Nixon D, Berkahn L, Baker J:
                                                                                                         1. Cundy T, Nixon D, Berkahn L, Baker I:
tinine ratios that predict values for the albu-       Measuring the albumin excretion rate:
                                                                                                            Measuring the albumin excretion rate:
min excretion rate. Both have emphasized              agreement between methods and biologi-
                                                                                                            agreement between methods and biologi-
                                                      cal variability. Diabet Med 9:138–143, 1992
that values discriminating between normal                                                                   cal variability. Diabet Med 9:138–143,
and abnormal albuminuria are dependent                                                                      1992
on age and sex (1,2). Even though this                                                                   2. Cundy T, Baker I: Prediction of albumin
approach is useful, it is worth remembering
                                                  Response to Cundy                                         excretion rate from albumin-to-creatinine
an alternative method that was first sug-         and Baker                                                 ratio (Letter). Diabetes Care 23:714, 2000
                                                                                                         3. Cockcroft DS, Gault MH: Prediction of
gested by Ginsberg et al. (3) in 1983. The
                                                                                                            creatinine clearance from serum creati-
daily urine creatinine excretion, which is              he methodology recommended by
relatively constant, can be estimated from
the Cockcroft-Gault formula, which takes
into account age, sex, and body size (4).
The formula is as follows: creatinine excre-
                                                  T     Cundy and Baker (2) is a useful
                                                        means of estimating 24-h urinary
                                                  albumin excretion rates from the albumin-
                                                  to-creatinine ratio (ACR). Such a method-
                                                                                                            nine. Nephron 16:31–41, 1976
                                                                                                         4. Harvey JN, Hood K, Platts JK, Devarajoo
                                                                                                            S, Meadows PA: Prediction of albumin
                                                                                                            excretion rate from albumin-to-creatinine
                                                                                                            ratio. Diabetes Care 22:1597–1598, 1999
tion (mmol/day) = [(140 age) weight               ology uses the Cockcroft-Gault equation to             5. Watts GF, Morris RW, Khan K, Polak A:
(kg)]/k, where k = 665 for men and 782 for        factor age, sex, and body weight into                     Urinary albumin excretion in healthy
women. The estimated urine creatinine             account (1,2). The diagnostic values of the               adult subjects: reference values and some
multiplied by the albumin-to-creatinine           ACR, as it is commonly used in current                    factors affecting their interpretation. Clin
                                                                                                            Chim Acta 172:191–198, 1988
ratio gives an estimate of 24-h urine albu-       methodologies, incorporate only the effect
min excretion.                                    of sex. Cundy and Baker’s recommenda-
     In 1992, we published data on the            tion is useful for the comparison of ACR
agreement between the albumin excretion           values with 24-h urinary albumin values,              Is There Any Use for
rate estimated in this way from spot sam-         but in Europe in recent years, we have                the Oral Glucose
ples and the albumin excretion rate mea-          moved toward timed overnight collections              Tolerance Test?
sured by 24-h urine collections and on the        as the gold standard in the assessment of
agreement between repeated 24-h urine             diabetic proteinuria, because posture and
collections (5). We demonstrated that the         activity are controlled for and collection is            n relation to the ongoing debate on the
estimate gave numerically similar values to
the measured samples with a degree of
agreement similar to that found between
timed collections. The errors inherent in
                                                  simplified for the patient. The Cockcroft-
                                                  Gault equation, as currently validated,
                                                  does not allow calculation of the overnight
                                                  albumin excretion rate from the ACR (3).
                                                                                                        I  new diagnostic criteria, we appreciated
                                                                                                           the balanced view of Dr. Perry (1),
                                                                                                        expressed in a letter published in a recent
                                                                                                        issue of this journal. The author quite cor-
the estimates were trivial compared with          In general clinical practice, a decision on           rectly states that merits and limits are built
the day-to-day variability in albumin             whether the result indicates normal albu-             into any screening method and warns
excretion (5). This simple device deserves        min excretion, microalbuminuria, or estab-            against sterile discussions about the need
wider appreciation.                               lished nephropathy is all that is required.           for a compromise between the pragmatic


714                                                                                                   DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000

===== PDF PAGE 16 of 17 (reading order, same page) =====
Letters

Prediction of
Albumin Excretion
Rate From
Albumin-to-Creatinine
Ratio
wo recent articles in Diabetes Care
have continued the long-running
debate about methods of screening
for albuminuria in diabetes (1,2). The crux
of this issue is whether the information that
can be obtained from spot urine samples
(either albumin concentration or the albumin-to-creatinine ratio) can provide equivalent information to a timed albumin
excretion rate, on which our current definitions of albuminuria are based. Spot samples have the huge advantage of not requiring accuracy of either timing or volume
measurement, both of which are potent
sources of patient dissatisfaction and error
in clinical practice.
Harvey et al. (1) and Bakker (2) have
estimated cutoff values for albumin-to-creatinine ratios that predict values for the albumin excretion rate. Both have emphasized
that values discriminating between normal
and abnormal albuminuria are dependent
on age and sex (1,2). Even though this
approach is useful, it is worth remembering
an alternative method that was first suggested by Ginsberg et al. (3) in 1983. The
daily urine creatinine excretion, which is
relatively constant, can be estimated from
the Cockcroft-Gault formula, which takes
into account age, sex, and body size (4).
The formula is as follows: creatinine excretion (mmol/day) = [(140 age) weight
(kg)]/k, where k = 665 for men and 782 for
women. The estimated urine creatinine
multiplied by the albumin-to-creatinine
ratio gives an estimate of 24-h urine albumin excretion.
In 1992, we published data on the
agreement between the albumin excretion
rate estimated in this way from spot samples and the albumin excretion rate measured by 24-h urine collections and on the
agreement between repeated 24-h urine
collections (5). We demonstrated that the
estimate gave numerically similar values to
the measured samples with a degree of
agreement similar to that found between
timed collections. The errors inherent in
the estimates were trivial compared with
the day-to-day variability in albumin
excretion (5). This simple device deserves
wider appreciation.

T

714

TIM CUNDY, MD
JOHN BAKER, MD
From the Department of Medicine, University of
Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
Address correspondence to Tim Cundy, MD,
Department of Medicine, Auckland Hospital, Private Bag 92-019, Auckland 1, New Zealand. E-mail:
t.cundy@auckland.ac.nz.

References
1. Harvey JN, Hook K, Platts JK, Devarjoo S,
Meadows PA: Prediction of albumin excretion rate from albumin-to-creatinine ratio
(Letter). Diabetes Care 22:1597–1598, 1999
2. Bakker AJ: Detection of microalbuminuria:
receiver operating characteristic curve
analysis favors albumin-to-creatinine ratio
over albumin concentration. Diabetes Care
22:307–313, 1999
3. Ginsberg JM, Chang BS, Matarese RA,
Garella S: Use of single-voided urine samples to estimate quantitative proteinuria.
N Engl J Med 309:1543–1546, 1983
4. Cockcroft DW, Gault MH: Prediction of
creatinine clearance from serum creatinine. Nephron 16:31–41, 1976
5. Cundy TF, Nixon D, Berkahn L, Baker J:
Measuring the albumin excretion rate:
agreement between methods and biological variability. Diabet Med 9:138–143, 1992

Response to Cundy
and Baker
he methodology recommended by
Cundy and Baker (2) is a useful
means of estimating 24-h urinary
albumin excretion rates from the albuminto-creatinine ratio (ACR). Such a methodology uses the Cockcroft-Gault equation to
factor age, sex, and body weight into
account (1,2). The diagnostic values of the
ACR, as it is commonly used in current
methodologies, incorporate only the effect
of sex. Cundy and Baker’s recommendation is useful for the comparison of ACR
values with 24-h urinary albumin values,
but in Europe in recent years, we have
moved toward timed overnight collections
as the gold standard in the assessment of
diabetic proteinuria, because posture and
activity are controlled for and collection is
simplified for the patient. The CockcroftGault equation, as currently validated,
does not allow calculation of the overnight
albumin excretion rate from the ACR (3).
In general clinical practice, a decision on
whether the result indicates normal albumin excretion, microalbuminuria, or established nephropathy is all that is required.

T

For this purpose, the cutoff values that we
derived are satisfactory (4). They generally
provide a clear distinction of microalbuminuria from normal, because the diagnostic values are far removed from the normal
population mean (5).
We found that the ACR had less
within-subject variation than timed overnight measurements (4). For this reason,
coupled with its simplicity, we feel that the
use of single samples with or without the
conversion to 24-h albumin excretion
rates, as advocated by Cundy and Baker, is
preferable for large surveys and routine
clinical use.
JOHN N. HARVEY, MD
From the University of Wales College of Medicine,
Wrexham Academic Unit, Wrexham, U.K.
Address correspondence to John N. Harvey, MD,
Diabetes Unit, Gladstone Centre, Maelor Hospital,
Croesnewydd Road, Wrexham Clwyd LL13 7TD,
U.K. E-mail: john.harvey@new-tr.wales.nhs.uk.

References
1. Cundy T, Nixon D, Berkahn L, Baker I:
Measuring the albumin excretion rate:
agreement between methods and biological variability. Diabet Med 9:138–143,
1992
2. Cundy T, Baker I: Prediction of albumin
excretion rate from albumin-to-creatinine
ratio (Letter). Diabetes Care 23:714, 2000
3. Cockcroft DS, Gault MH: Prediction of
creatinine clearance from serum creatinine. Nephron 16:31–41, 1976
4. Harvey JN, Hood K, Platts JK, Devarajoo
S, Meadows PA: Prediction of albumin
excretion rate from albumin-to-creatinine
ratio. Diabetes Care 22:1597–1598, 1999
5. Watts GF, Morris RW, Khan K, Polak A:
Urinary albumin excretion in healthy
adult subjects: reference values and some
factors affecting their interpretation. Clin
Chim Acta 172:191–198, 1988

Is There Any Use for
the Oral Glucose
Tolerance Test?
n relation to the ongoing debate on the
new diagnostic criteria, we appreciated
the balanced view of Dr. Perry (1),
expressed in a letter published in a recent
issue of this journal. The author quite correctly states that merits and limits are built
into any screening method and warns
against sterile discussions about the need
for a compromise between the pragmatic

I

DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000


===== PDF PAGE 17 of 17 (pdftotext -layout) =====
                                                                                                                                                 Letters


and the ideal. One should bear in mind that       various European countries. These data                 Address correspondence to Olga Vaccaro, MD,
the main objective should be to ensure that       clearly show that a fasting glucose of 5.5         Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
people with abnormal glucose homeostatsis         mmol/l, a value well within the normal             II Policlinico, via S. Pansini 5, 80131 Naples, Italy.
                                                                                                     E-mail: scalaros@unina.it.
are detected in the community. To serve this      range, is to be used as the threshold for
purpose, the author suggests that the best        proposing OGTT to detect 93% of all those
compromise is a screening approach based          with diabetes diagnosed on the basis of            References
on the measurement of fasting glucose             postload values. However, even with the             1. Perry RC: Impaired fasting glucose and
combined with the oral glucose tolerance          use of this low threshold, the ability for fast-       cardiovascular disease (Letter). Diabetes
test (OGTT) in those with abnormal fasting        ing glucose levels to identify IGT does not            Care 22:1919–1920, 1999
values. We largely share the view of a need       improve substantially. Therefore, perform-          2. Barrett-Connor E, Ferrara A: Isolated
for a compromise, as the OGTT is little           ing OGTT on people with abnormal fasting               postchallenge hyperglycemia and the risk
                                                                                                         of fatal cardiovascular disease in older
used by clinicians and may be unfeasible in       glucose would discriminate between dia-                women and men: the Rancho Bernardo
many contexts as a screening test on a pop-       betes and impaired fasting glucose, but will           Study. Diabetes Care 21:1236–1239, 1998
ulation basis. However, we would like to          be of little help in identifying IGT; this is       3. Shaw JE, de Courten M, Boyko EJ, Zimmet
comment on the suggested approach.                not of minor importance, because preven-               PZ: Impact of new diagnostic criteria for
     In relation to the diagnosis of diabetes,    tion of progression to overt diabetes in this          diabetes on different populations. Diabetes
there is mounting evidence that there is a        group seems to be possible.                            Care 22:762–766, 1999
sizeable proportion of previously undiag-              To preliminarily explore alternative           4. The DECODE Study Group on behalf of
nosed diabetic people with a postload glu-        strategies, we analyzed data relative to an            the European Diabetes Epidemiology
cose 11.1 mmol/l (200 mg/dl) and fast-           occupational group of employees of the                 Group: Is fasting glucose sufficient to
ing plasma glucose 7.0 mmol/l (126               Italian telephone company (n = 1,038)                  define diabetes? Epidemiological data
                                                                                                         from 20 European studies. Diabetologia 42:
mg/dl). This proportion varies in different       screened by OGTT in 1980, in whom                      647–654, 1999
populations and ranges from 32 to 72%             major cardiovascular risk factors were also         5. Vaccaro O, Ruffa G, Imperatore G, Iovino
(2–4). Furthermore, in a pooled analysis of       measured (9). Of the 68 participants with              V, Rivellese AA, Riccardi G: Risk of dia-
20 studies conducted in different Euro-           postload glucose in the IGT range, 58 (i.e.,           betes in the new diagnostic category of
pean countries, as many as 31% of those           85%) clustered in the group of people with             impaired fasting glucose. Diabetes Care 22:
who are diabetic, according to postchal-          at least 1 among the following conditions:             1490–1493, 1999
lenge plasma glucose, have normal fasting         BMI 28, fasting triglycerides 180, blood          6. Shaw JE, Zimmet PZ, De Couten M,
values (6.1 mmol/l, 110 mg/dl) (4) and,          pressure 140/90, or on current treatment              Dowse GK, Chitson P, Gareboo H, Hemraj
therefore, would not be detected by a             for hypertension or hypertriglyceridemia.              F, Fareed D, Tuomilehto J, Alberti KG:
screening procedure based essentially on          We, therefore, suggest that as a possible              Impaired fasting glucose or impaired glu-
                                                                                                         cose tolerance? Diabetes Care 22:399–402,
fasting glucose measurements. In addition,        compromise between the pragmatic and                   1999
fasting glucose is of little help in diagnosing   the ideal, the OGTT could be used, irre-            7. The DECODE Study Group on behalf of
impaired glucose intolerance (IGT). Evi-          spective of fasting glucose levels, for selec-         the European Diabetes Epidemiology
dence is accumulating that most people            tive screenings of high-risk groups (i.e.,             Group: Glucose tolerance and mortality:
with IGT, from 54 to 67%, have fasting            those with 1 or more of the features of the            comparison of WHO and American Dia-
glucose in the normal range (6.1 mmol/l,         metabolic syndrome: hypertension, hyper-               betes Association diagnostic criteria.
110 mg/dl) (4–6). It has also become clear        triglyceridemia, low HDL cholesterol, obe-             Lancet 354:617–621, 1999
that isolated postload hyperglycemia is a         sity/large waist circumference, and/or posi-        8. Shaw JE, Hodge AM, de Courten M, Chit-
strong predictor of mortality (2,7,8). Fur-       tive first-degree family history of diabetes).         son P, Zimmet PZ: Isolated post-challenge
thermore, we have shown that in Cau-                                                                     hyperglycemia confirmed as a risk factor
                                                                                                         for mortality. Diabetologia 42:1050–1054,
casians, IGT is a strong predictor of pro-                               OLGA VACCARO, MD                1999
gression to diabetes (5), and similar data                             GIANLUCA RUFFA, MD             9. Vaccaro O, Rivellese A, Riccardi G,
were produced in other ethnic groups (6).                             GABRIELE RICCARDI, MD              Capaldo B, Tutino L, Annuzzi G, Mancini
     Moreover, the suggested 2-step approach                                                             M: Impaired glucose tolerance and risk
has been mimicked through the use of              From the Department of Clinical and Experimental       factors for atherosclerosis. Arteriosclerosis
pooled data from 20 studies conducted in          Medicine, Federico II University, Naples, Italy.       4:592–597, 1984




DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000                                                                                                          715

===== PDF PAGE 17 of 17 (reading order, same page) =====
Letters

and the ideal. One should bear in mind that
the main objective should be to ensure that
people with abnormal glucose homeostatsis
are detected in the community. To serve this
purpose, the author suggests that the best
compromise is a screening approach based
on the measurement of fasting glucose
combined with the oral glucose tolerance
test (OGTT) in those with abnormal fasting
values. We largely share the view of a need
for a compromise, as the OGTT is little
used by clinicians and may be unfeasible in
many contexts as a screening test on a population basis. However, we would like to
comment on the suggested approach.
In relation to the diagnosis of diabetes,
there is mounting evidence that there is a
sizeable proportion of previously undiagnosed diabetic people with a postload glucose 11.1 mmol/l (200 mg/dl) and fasting plasma glucose 7.0 mmol/l (126
mg/dl). This proportion varies in different
populations and ranges from 32 to 72%
(2–4). Furthermore, in a pooled analysis of
20 studies conducted in different European countries, as many as 31% of those
who are diabetic, according to postchallenge plasma glucose, have normal fasting
values (6.1 mmol/l, 110 mg/dl) (4) and,
therefore, would not be detected by a
screening procedure based essentially on
fasting glucose measurements. In addition,
fasting glucose is of little help in diagnosing
impaired glucose intolerance (IGT). Evidence is accumulating that most people
with IGT, from 54 to 67%, have fasting
glucose in the normal range (6.1 mmol/l,
110 mg/dl) (4–6). It has also become clear
that isolated postload hyperglycemia is a
strong predictor of mortality (2,7,8). Furthermore, we have shown that in Caucasians, IGT is a strong predictor of progression to diabetes (5), and similar data
were produced in other ethnic groups (6).
Moreover, the suggested 2-step approach
has been mimicked through the use of
pooled data from 20 studies conducted in

DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 23, NUMBER 5, MAY 2000

various European countries. These data
clearly show that a fasting glucose of 5.5
mmol/l, a value well within the normal
range, is to be used as the threshold for
proposing OGTT to detect 93% of all those
with diabetes diagnosed on the basis of
postload values. However, even with the
use of this low threshold, the ability for fasting glucose levels to identify IGT does not
improve substantially. Therefore, performing OGTT on people with abnormal fasting
glucose would discriminate between diabetes and impaired fasting glucose, but will
be of little help in identifying IGT; this is
not of minor importance, because prevention of progression to overt diabetes in this
group seems to be possible.
To preliminarily explore alternative
strategies, we analyzed data relative to an
occupational group of employees of the
Italian telephone company (n = 1,038)
screened by OGTT in 1980, in whom
major cardiovascular risk factors were also
measured (9). Of the 68 participants with
postload glucose in the IGT range, 58 (i.e.,
85%) clustered in the group of people with
at least 1 among the following conditions:
BMI 28, fasting triglycerides 180, blood
pressure 140/90, or on current treatment
for hypertension or hypertriglyceridemia.
We, therefore, suggest that as a possible
compromise between the pragmatic and
the ideal, the OGTT could be used, irrespective of fasting glucose levels, for selective screenings of high-risk groups (i.e.,
those with 1 or more of the features of the
metabolic syndrome: hypertension, hypertriglyceridemia, low HDL cholesterol, obesity/large waist circumference, and/or positive first-degree family history of diabetes).
OLGA VACCARO, MD
GIANLUCA RUFFA, MD
GABRIELE RICCARDI, MD
From the Department of Clinical and Experimental
Medicine, Federico II University, Naples, Italy.

Address correspondence to Olga Vaccaro, MD,
Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
II Policlinico, via S. Pansini 5, 80131 Naples, Italy.
E-mail: scalaros@unina.it.

References
1. Perry RC: Impaired fasting glucose and
cardiovascular disease (Letter). Diabetes
Care 22:1919–1920, 1999
2. Barrett-Connor E, Ferrara A: Isolated
postchallenge hyperglycemia and the risk
of fatal cardiovascular disease in older
women and men: the Rancho Bernardo
Study. Diabetes Care 21:1236–1239, 1998
3. Shaw JE, de Courten M, Boyko EJ, Zimmet
PZ: Impact of new diagnostic criteria for
diabetes on different populations. Diabetes
Care 22:762–766, 1999
4. The DECODE Study Group on behalf of
the European Diabetes Epidemiology
Group: Is fasting glucose sufficient to
define diabetes? Epidemiological data
from 20 European studies. Diabetologia 42:
647–654, 1999
5. Vaccaro O, Ruffa G, Imperatore G, Iovino
V, Rivellese AA, Riccardi G: Risk of diabetes in the new diagnostic category of
impaired fasting glucose. Diabetes Care 22:
1490–1493, 1999
6. Shaw JE, Zimmet PZ, De Couten M,
Dowse GK, Chitson P, Gareboo H, Hemraj
F, Fareed D, Tuomilehto J, Alberti KG:
Impaired fasting glucose or impaired glucose tolerance? Diabetes Care 22:399–402,
1999
7. The DECODE Study Group on behalf of
the European Diabetes Epidemiology
Group: Glucose tolerance and mortality:
comparison of WHO and American Diabetes Association diagnostic criteria.
Lancet 354:617–621, 1999
8. Shaw JE, Hodge AM, de Courten M, Chitson P, Zimmet PZ: Isolated post-challenge
hyperglycemia confirmed as a risk factor
for mortality. Diabetologia 42:1050–1054,
1999
9. Vaccaro O, Rivellese A, Riccardi G,
Capaldo B, Tutino L, Annuzzi G, Mancini
M: Impaired glucose tolerance and risk
factors for atherosclerosis. Arteriosclerosis
4:592–597, 1984

715

